An engineer installs a new firewall that utilizes two separate wide area network (WAN) interfaces from two different vendors. What role does this implementation serve?

- Load Balancing

Variable Length Subnet Masking (VLSM) proceeds by identifying the largest subnets and organizing the scheme in descending order.

- The largest subnet is Network E. The most efficient VLSM mask is /26 starting with 192.168.0.1 and allowing for up to 62 usable IP addresses. Network E requires 32 IP addresses. If you start with a 192.168.0.0/27, it provides 30 IP addresses starting at 192.168.1.1 to 192.168.1.30 with 192.168.1.31 as the broadcast address. Because that is not high enough, the next logical choice is to use 192.168.0.0/26 which gives 62 available IP addresses starting at 192.168.1.1 to 192.168.1.62 with 192.168.1.63 as the broadcast address. Note that although the subnet ID is written with CIDR notation as 192.168.0.0/26 the 12.168.0.0 address is not actually part of the addresses that are used. It starts with 192.168.0.1.
- The next largest subnet is Network B. The most efficient VLSM mask is /27 starting with 192.168.0.64 and allowing for up to 30 hosts.
- The third largest subnet is Network A. The most efficient VLSM mask is /28 starting with 192.168.0.96 and allowing for up to 14 hosts. Since the client does not want room for expansion, this subnet allows the exact number of hosts needed and is the most efficient.
- The fourth largest subnet is Network D. The most efficient VLSM mask is /29 starting with 192.168.0.112 and allowing for up to 6 hosts.
- Lastly, the routers are connected using a point-to-point subnet named Network C. The most efficient VLSM mask is /30 starting with 192.168.0.120 allowing for up to 2 hosts.

Identify which strategy will NOT create redundancy for an entire network.

- Utilize NIC teaming to bond cable links at the host end.

A technician creates a hosts file on a computer as a short term fix for systems connectivity. What is the purpose of using this file?

- Names not resolving

A systems administrator wants to put in place a procedure for patch management on a Cisco network switch. Which of the following should the administrator perform before flashing the chip? (Select all that apply)

- Complete environment and compatibility checks
- Make a backup of the system configuration

A network administrator performs a site survey to determine the optimal position for an access point (AP). The AP must be able to reach the manager’s office in the far corner of the office floor. Which of the following should the network administrator consider when selecting a wireless router that can reach all users in the office and is compatible with most wireless devices? (Select all that apply)

- 2.4 Ghz frequency band
- Omnidirectional antennas
- 5.0 Ghz frequency band

Multiple routers are set up in the company's internal network. Offices in the building should be able to communicate with each other in a robust network architecture. The network should require minimum maintenance for the time being. Which of the following network types would provide such a network? (Select all that apply)

- Dynamic routing table
- Packet-switched network

A small business had a power failure. During recovery, systems testing began. Results indicated that internal voice calls worked properly. However, incoming and outgoing external calls did not work. Considering the components and functionality, which of the following is problematic?

- VoIP gateway

A company technical support representative troubleshoots a wireless network. Users state that the wireless signal barely spans across a large auditorium. According to the owner's manual, the signal should go beyond the current space. Which of the following wireless properties is likely causing the signal problem?

- Incorrect antenna placement

A network running critical services for a hospital begins having severe performance issues immediately after an update of the server OS. This is severely affecting network services. What should be the first response to this situation?

- Rollback the OS to the previous version

An IT specialist at a small company has to ensure the office file server maintains fault tolerance and does not lose its data. Downtime is not a problem, but the data on the server is critical. Identify the most effective courses of action (Select all that apply)

- Implement a backup strategy
- Set up a RAID (Type 1) drive on the file server to ensure data redundancy.


A network administrator purchased new network switches from a vendor. Upon receiving and installing them, what should the admin do to harden the device to ensure secure device configuration of the switches? (Select all that apply)

- Remove vendor-installed backdoors.
- Change default usernames and passwords.
- Disable or close unused ports and services.

A network administrator is creating documentation to accompany the restrictions for a remote access server. Which of the following is NOT a typical policy restriction the network admin should include in the documentation?

- Restriction of user access to software updates

A network expert reconfigures a trunk on a network to resolve a mismatch issue. Which of the following technologies benefits from the reconfiguration?

- VLAN

A set of workstations have been installed in an office floor. The network administrators are preparing to join these servers to the domain after they receive an Internet Protocol (IP) address from the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) server. What are the minimum DHCP scope options required to simplify these computers joining the domain? (Select all that apply)

- Default gateway
- DNS IP address(es)
- NTP IP address(es)

A security team is reviewing the authentication controls on the corporate network. Which of the following is an important reason for the team to implement role separation and least privilege? (Select all that apply)

- To find adversaries impersonating a user
- To expose employees who may perpetrate fraud
- To uncover the risk of insider threats

An IT engineer works with desktop installation technicians who deploy new computers to users. The installation technicians report that users in one area of the building do not achieve network speeds above 100 Mbps. After evaluating the cabling choices, the IT engineer determines that the problem area uses which type of cabling?

- Cat 5



An IT systems engineer considers virtualizing a server farm. Which of the following satisfy the use of a type I hypervisor? (Select all that apply)

- Microsoft Hyper-V
- VMWare ESX Server

Which of the following Domain Name System (DNS) records can identify a record that is providing a network service or protocol?

- SRV

A machine learning cloud application provides meaningful data with the company's local customer information and purchase history. The company considers this data sensitive. How should the company manage this data when interfacing with the cloud service?

- Data remains on local storage

An attacker exploited a vulnerability within the operating system of a computer inside a bank’s network. Although the attacker posed no serious threat, the network administrator wants to start taking security more seriously. Which of the following is important for the network administrator to implement to mitigate against these types of vulnerabilities? (Select all that apply)

- Patch management
- Vulnerability scanning

Cloud offerings, such as Amazon's Elastic Compute Cloud and Microsoft's Azure Virtual Machines, are examples of what type of service?

- Infrastructure

A user requires a dial-up connection to an Internet service provider for remote access. The connection uses a data link protocol over a broadband connection. An IT support technician evaluates the configuration options on the user's laptop. Which of the following will provide successful connectivity?

- PPPoE

A small business wants to make its website public. Two physical servers that host the website have load balancing configured. Each server has its own Internet Protocol (IP) address. Having only one public IP address from the Internet Service Provider (ISP), what may a network administrator set up so the company's website can interface with public users?

- Set up Port Address Translation (PAT)


A financial institution is having problems with a specialized application. An intern managing the computer systems and network begins the troubleshooting process. Which of the following types of logs would be the best place to start looking?

- Application logs

In Linux terminal, what does the "-e" in the command netstat -a -i -e represent?

- Extra information

A cable installation tech runs fiber cable for a new network install. When finishing the ferrule tip which holds the glass strand, which option does the tech implement to ensure the highest quality is achieved?

- UPC

The maximum tolerable downtime (MTD) is the longest period of time that a business function outage may occur without causing irrecoverable business failure. The business cannot go longer than 60 hours.

- The mean time to repair (MTTR) the servers is a measure of the time taken to correct a fault so that the system is restored to full operation. IT is estimating 18 hours.
- The mean time between failures (MTBF) is used for a repairable (such as a server). The calculation for MTBF is the total time(devices \* hours) divided by the number of failures. 525
- MTTF 350
- RTO 18
- RPO 9
- Not achievable

IT support places a server that acts as a virtual private network (VPN) concentrator. The technicians place it on the network's edge in a demilitarized zone (DMZ). Which appliance does support use to implement this solution?

- Firewall

When an internet customer wants to set up a small office/home office (SOHO) network, what are the main concerns with using a Pre-Shared Key (PSK) wireless local area network (WLAN) authentication to encrypt communications? (Select all that apply)

- A pre-shared key fails to provide accounting
- periodically changing the key is difficult
- distribution of the key or passphrase cannot be secured.


A network administrator wants a network switch to perform authentication of attached devices before activating their port on the switch. Which of the following is a means of ensuring only valid hosts are connecting to a network?

- IEEE 802.1X

An IT engineer discovers that a problematic computer is using a transmit/receive reverse configuration. Which of the following refers to this type of issue?

- Crossover Cable

The administrator of a small but fast-growing company sets out to develop a privileged user agreement (PUA) to ensure correct classification of network resources and information assets and that the correct staff member handles them. Which of the following scenarios demonstrates proper behavior according to common rules that might be found in a PUA. (Select all that apply)

- A privileged user utilizes network resources to perform the job function.
- An employee is forced to take mandatory vacation time.

A network administrator needs to upgrade a switch firmware remotely. The firmware bits must be transferred over the local area network (LAN) with or without encryption. Which of the following options is connection-oriented and guarantees delivery in this manner?

- SFTP
- FTP
- Telnet

A multi-tenant third-party cloud service that is available via the Internet can be described as which of the following cloud delivery models?

- Public

There are two types of clustering. Identify both types (Select all that apply)

- Active/Passive
- Active/Active

An IT engineer working on a Fibre Channel storage area network (SAN) implementation suggests lossless Ethernet technology to avoid the cost of specialized adapters and cabling. Analyze the available options and known capabilities. Of these choices, which is the best option for the engineer to suggest implementing as a solution?

- FCoE



A small financial firm has leased a recovery site as part of their disaster recovery plan. They have set it up with the hardware needed for failover. The plan includes protocols for transferring data manually from backups to the recovery set and switching services over to the recovery site. It is expected to take a couple days. Which of the following terms best describes the recovery site?

- Warm site

A company is considering using a co-location connection with a cloud service provider to support some virtual services in its data center. This will provide the company a hybrid cloud model to easily move services from the local infrastructure to the cloud during peak season. Which of the following network components are most likely required for hybrid solution? (Select all that apply)

- VLAN
- Private Link
- MPLS

Configuration Management Systems (CMS) distinguish between two basic types of procedural documentation. Which type of documentation describes step-by-step instructions for a specific task using specific technologies, products or credentials?

- Work instruction

When considering a troubleshooting methodology, which of the following topics concern finding a problem? (Choose all that apply)

- Duplicate the problem, if possible
- Identify symptoms
- Gather information

A network administrator is unable to access files on a remote system. A network firewall seems to be blocking traffic from passing through. Which of the following will the administrator most likely need to reconfigure for inbound and outbound traffic?

- TCP port 20
- TFTP traffic

Mobile users in an organization complain about limited functionality in a company's headquarters. The IT staff decide to extend mobile access capabilities by widening the current wireless network. When evaluating the expansion configuration, a wireless access point media access control (MAC) address relates to which option?

- Basic Service Set Identifier (BSSID)


The network security team of a company wants to reduce the system attack surface to limit the ways an attacker can connect to the network. How can the team achieve this to harden the network? (Select all that apply)

- Close unused device ports
- Disable unused IP ports

A network administrator is designing a set of Internet Protocol (IP) addresses for a Class C network in order to lease it out to clients when booting. A set of printers will require the same IP address upon renewing the lease. Which of the following network components will support this design?

- DHCP
- IP reservation

Users at an organization are not able to access certain internal network resources. The organization practices a high level of security between different departments. After evaluating the situation, a junior level engineer determines that hardware addresses are blocked on the network. Based on the findings, which device type is causing the problem?

- Switch

Users in an organization report that email is not working properly. An IT engineer uses a command with the set type argument to check for valid email servers and discovers that inbound delivery is a problem. Considering the following utilities, which of the following does the engineer use to troubleshoot the problem?

- nslookup

IT engineers compile a network inventory and propose several upgrades. One upgrade in particular employs an active approach to address network intrusion activity. Which of the following options addresses an active solution to the upgrade proposal?

- IPS

An enterprise client is running hundreds of virtual machines (VM) concurrently on a large server farm. They need a new method of backup to deal with the large amounts of VMs and their variations. Which of the following is the best method to deal with this?

- Set up the virtualization hypervisor to take snapshots of each VM

A help desk technician connects a new computer to the network using a 15 foot cat 6 cable. The connection fails during a ping test. After some troubleshooting, the technician discovers a short in the cable. Of the following diagnosis descriptions, which should the technician conclude is the cause of the problem?

- Two conductors are joined at some point

A network analyst is concerned with security in Linux. What interest does the analyst have in the /etc/passwd file?

- /etc/passwd stores user settings

IT security specialists respond to a security breach. An investigation determines that open service ports on an old server was the entry point for malicious activity. Which of the following utilities should the specialists use to determine the cause of the breach?

- netstat

What type of credentials should a network administrator base the security system around in order to protect the company's resources on an enterprise network?

- Authentication

An end user downloaded a driver update file from the Internet. Why is it important that the user downloads the file from a respectable source? (Select all that apply)

- To prove the integrity of the file
- To make sure the hashes match

A large university campus experiences communication problems between two buildings over a fiber connection. A cabling engineer uses an optical time domain reflectometer to troubleshoot the problem. For which purpose does the engineer use this piece of equipment?

- Location of a line break

Which of the following is true about using Aggressive Mode Internet Key Exchange? (Select all that apply)

- It allows a snooper to perform brute-force password-guessing attacks on the authentication information
- It allows a mitm to perform a dictionary attack
- Anyone sniffing the traffic on the network will see the identifiers exchanged in cleartext

Users mention that in a certain part of a company building, the wireless signal is weak. What TWO areas should IT support investigate to help remedy the problem?

- Power level
- Channel overlap



Within a corporate environment, Windows Local and Domain Administrator accounts can easily change and modify logging settings without another administrator being notified of such a change. Which of the following is an access control that should be put in place to better delegate responsibilities between different privileged user accounts? (Select all that apply)

- Separation of duties
- Role separation

A database application running on an old server consistently provides a slow experience to users. There is a plan to upgrade to a network storage device to house the data. Considering the best approach to network-based database storage, which solutions are appropriate? (Select all that apply)

- Block level access
- SAN

A computer is unable to obtain a dynamically assigned Internet protocol (IP) address. What does IT discover to be the problem?

- Hardware failure

A user is having trouble downloading a file from a file server. A network technician checks the connection and that ping commands are receiving replies. The technician can also browse correctly to the file server using the Windows Explorer. At what layer of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model should the technician begin to troubleshoot and why? (Select all that apply)

- File application is misconfigured
- At the application layer

Engineers implement multiprotocol label switching (MPLS) on a network to improve congestion control. In what environment will MPLS benefit the network?

- packet switched

An attacker drives around town with a wireless laptop, scanning for unsecure wireless local area networks (WLANs). Which of the following is an encryption scheme that is least vulnerable to this type of war driving?

- WPA2

IT implements a new network storage device for users at a location. Part of the roll-out includes the implementation of network file system (NFS) shares. Which solution has IT implemented?

- NAS

and network infrastructure against attacks. Which of the following deploys systems in a secure configuration to harden the devices on the network, and reduce the attack surface of service vulnerabilities that an attacker could possibly exploit?

- Disabling unnecessary protocols

Which of the following are characteristics of cloud services as opposed to local services? (Select all that apply)

- Rapid elasticity
- Pay-per-use

Which of the following statements associated with audit logs are true? (Select all that apply)

- Logging provides evidence of accountability
- Auditing successful access attempts can consume a lot of disk space
- Logging provides for non-repudiation

A network engineer plans a storage area network (SAN) installation that will utilize Fibre Channel switched fabric (FC-SW). Which components will the engineer configure to implement the SAN's functionality? (Select all that apply)

- Target
- Initiator

A network administrator is setting up a 192.168.1.0/24 network using variable length subnet masking (VLSM) to support the sales and marketing department. The sales department has 120 computers and the marketing department has 50 computers. Which of the following Internet Protocol (IP) address configurations will provide adequate support for the marketing department? (Select all that apply)

- 255.25.255.192
- 192.168.1.128

An organization has a remote office that uses higher frequencies available in a copper telephone line as a data communications channel to connect to the main office. Which physical technology does the remote office utilize?

- DSL

New workstations are set up in the office. They currently do not have an Internet Protocol (IP) address set and are connected to the network. These workstations will need to work with applications that are time sensitive. What must the system administrator configure for these applications to function correctly?

- Configure the correct NTP settings

On the multi-floor office, the staff is deploying multiple switches and there must be multiple broadcast domains. The Layer 2 switch with a single broadcast domain requires more bandwidth as more hosts are connecting to it. How can these switches be set up to accommodate the network architecture?

- Configure multiple VLANs

How can deploying a honeypot or honeynet within a demilitarized zone (DMZ) help an organization improve its security systems? (Select all that apply)

- It provides detection of internal fraud
- It provides evidence of penetration to a security zone
- It provides an early warning of an attacker

Which of the following network protocols can you use to remotely manage network systems or devices? (Select all that apply)

- Telnet
- SSH
- HTTPS
- HTTP

A network consultant is doing IT contingency planning and is trying to identify likely points of failure for the network. Which of the following would the consultant identify as Single Points of Failure in need of upgrades for added redundancy? (Select all that apply)

- There is a lack of a load balancing device
- There is a single power supply for a critical server

Resource Records

- Represents an alias for a host: CNAME
- Identifies authoritative DNS name servers for the zone: DNS
- Identifies an email server for the domain: MX
- Identifies the primary DNS name server that is authoritative for the zone and resolves names: SOA
- Resolves a hostname to an IPv4 address: A
- Resolves a hostname to an IPv6 address: AAAA
- Identifies a record that is providing a network service or protocol: SRV
- Resolves an IP address to a host name in reverse lookup zones: PTR
- Stores any free form text that may be needed to support other network services: TXT



Windows workstations at a small company are not able to log on to a Windows server. Which of the following is the likely cause?

- Incorrect system time

As part of a defensive in-depth strategy, a network administrator wants to protect the hosts and network infrastructure against attacks. Which of the following deploys systems in a secure configuration to harden the devices on the network, and reduce the attack surface of service vulnerabilities that an attacker could possibly exploit?

- Disabling unnecessary protocols

Recently booted computer systems at a large company are not able to access any network resources. IT investigates and finds the systems configured with automatic private IP addressing (APIPA) addresses. Consider the given choices and then determine which could cause the issue. (Choose all that apply)

- Exhausted DHCP scope

Multiple routers are setup in the company's internal network. Offices in the building should be able to communicate with each other in a robust network architecture. The network should require minimum maintenance for the time being. Which of the following network types would provide such a network? (Select all that apply)

- Dynamic routing table
- Packet-switched network

A layer 3 network device is not functioning properly. IT engineers monitor the device for anomalies. Of the possible troubleshooting approaches, the engineers should configure and use which of the following options together? (Select two)

- Protocol analyzer
- Packet sniffer

Users at an organization attend training on a new Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) phone system. During the session, a discussion of endpoint solutions will take place. Which of the following options are considered endpoints. (Select all that apply)

- Computer
- Smartphone

Why should a security operations center (SOC) analyst still investigate the alert of a known scheduled penetration test? Specifically, the scheduled penetration test was an authorized port scan of the network.

- To detect malicious activity

Which of the following is the core function of a Security Information and Event Management System (SEIM).

- Aggregate logs from multiple sources and correlate data points into indicators of compromise













