### **Poor Physical Security Measures**
The best electronic security in the world will not help you if your physical security is weak. Even the best encryption on the market today can be eventually overcome through sheer brute force methods of trying key after key until one finally unlocks your secrets. Yet SecOps teams still strongly urge their users to encrypt their data. The reason? It is all about time. The SecOps team, or more accurately, software the SecOps team uses, frequently replaces all the encryption keys on the network. This means that even if you captured and then cracked one encryption key, potentially within days that key will no longer be in use and therefore will not unlock the data.

However, there is a loophole in this strategy: theft. If attackers gain access to your files or to your physical computers, they can simply steal a copy of the data. The SecOps team cannot change the encryption key if the copy leaves the network, which means the attackers now have time on their side. Though it may take months or even years to crack the encryption through brute force, it will yield eventually. The moral of the story is that you need to protect your assets with both physical and electronic security measures.
### **Weak Passwords or Using Default Passwords**
Short, simple passwords are easy for attackers to compromise either by guessing them or by breaking them using brute force tools that leverage dictionaries of common words and letter combinations. You can combat this by using long, complex passwords that include upper and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols, but these passwords are difficult to memorize. The irony is that increasing password complexity requirements may lead to more trouble because some users will just write down the complex passwords rather than memorize them.

Another challenge is relying on default passwords instead of changing them. It is very easy to find the default password for most devices using a simple internet search. If you install a new device and leave the password at its default value, you have essentially left your system unlocked. While compromising a server is bad, consider the amount of visibility and control that an attacker would have if they gained access to your switches, wireless access points, routers, and firewalls.
### **Misconfigured Firewall Rules**
Again, consider that your firewall had a default password and an attacker has just gained access to it. The attacker could easily change the firewall configuration to allow access into your network without your knowledge. This is a bit like leaving a key on your doorstep, in plain sight. An attacker could come along, make a copy of the key, and secretly enter your locked home without leaving a trace behind.

Configuration mistakes are equally dangerous to your security and can also leave holes open for would-be attackers. It is a good policy to regularly review your firewall configuration, identify what each rule does, remove any rules that are no longer needed, and regularly change the password.
### **Personal Devices Within the Network**
Many businesses are adopting a mobile computing strategy that often includes a concept known as bring your own device (BYOD), which encourages users to bring their personal computers, tablets, or phones to work to use on the network. Allowing users to bring their own computer may save a company money at first, but extreme care must be taken to ensure those devices do not contaminate the network with viruses or malware they picked up elsewhere. For instance, imagine you have a laptop computer that you use at home to watch cat videos and shop online. Unbeknownst to you, one of those websites was actually compromised, and that cat video just brought home a nasty virus to your computer. Without realizing you were doing any harm, the next morning you take your laptop to work and proceed to infect the entire network. This sort of attack is known as a Trojan horse because, like its historical namesake, the Trojan horse unleashes a multitude of viruses, malware, or ransomware into a network from one seemingly innocuous computer.

While that may seem unlikely, it happens often enough that some corporations require their workers to install special approved antivirus and anti-malware software on their devices before connecting to the corporate network.
### **Advanced Persistent Threats**
Using the earlier analogy from the cat video virus, consider now that the virus actually did not do anything. Or so it seems. In reality, it is lying in wait for some preordained time or a trigger from an outside source, at which point it will unleash its attack. This is known as an advanced persistent threat (APT) because the virus or malware remains undetected while it sits idle for long periods, perhaps months, just waiting for the right time. The real threat here would be ransomware or other highly destructive malware, which, once activated, causes so much damage that the IT department must restore from backups. But what if the virus infected the backups? That is exactly what an APT does. It sits idle long enough to ensure that it has been added to as many backups as possible so that even if you restore from backup, you have no choice but to comply with the attacker.
### **Zero-Day: Protecting Against the Unknown**
Thus far the impact and mitigation of vulnerabilities that are known to the public have been discussed, but what about those that are just discovered, or those that were discovered but never reported? You now enter the world of the zero-day exploits. The term zero-day alludes to the fact that the exploit or vulnerability is not yet known by the public, meaning there is no patch available to mitigate this vulnerability.

Unfortunately, not all security analysts work for the good guys. Some people are paid to discover vulnerabilities in software, and then report them only to illicit organizations that will then use them to attack their targets. Zero-day exploits are particularly dangerous because no pattern files exist in your antivirus or anti-malware software.

The good news is that there is hope. Some intrusion prevention system (IPS) vendors include an option that allows administrators to forward unknown or suspicious code patterns to the vendor for analysis. If enabled, the IPS or firewall device blocks the unknown code the first time it sees it but may permit the code to pass later if the security vendor determines that it is not a risk. Of course, not all firewall and IPS vendors provide this level of security. In those cases, the customer remains vulnerable to the zero-day vulnerabilities.

Not all attackers are malicious or bad actors; some hackers are actually good and help companies protect their networks. In fact, there is an entire branch of InfoSec jobs known as penetration testers who are tasked with attempting to compromise a network’s security. Here you will review the various types of attackers and their function or role in network security.
### **Vulnerability Testers**
As the name suggests, a vulnerability tester is responsible for scanning servers and network devices for known vulnerabilities. There are a variety of vulnerability scanning tools on the market. Some are open source, such as Nessus, whereas most are commercial products.

Typically, vulnerability testers are the good guys, though hackers also play a similar role, which attempts to find new vulnerabilities in software that can be exploited.
### **Blue, Red, White, and Purple Teams**
If you really want to know how well your security can withstand an attack, add some friendly competition. The terms *red team* and *blue team* originated in the military. The red team attempts to compromise the security, while the blue team defends. There may also be a neutral white team that observes the festivities and may even serve as referee.

Some companies use this attack and defend approach but take it to the next level by involving continuous improvement in the process. This is referred to as purple team (remember that red and blue together make purple). In the purple team approach, the red and blue team engage, and then when certain success criteria are met, the teams debrief, cross-train each other, and repeat. This is also known as an iterate and improve model.
### **Hackers: White Hat, Black Hat, and Gray Hat**
If you have ever seen an old western movie or TV show, you may immediately recognize this reference to hat colors. In those shows, the bad guys typically wore black hats, while the good guys wore white hats. Fast forward to today: we now use the terms black hat, white hat, and even gray hat to describe InfoSec hackers and their intentions or ethical position.

White hat hackers are IT professionals who specialize in penetrating or compromising network security but only to help an organization improve its own security posture. Most importantly, they only perform the attacks when authorized to do so; to the fullest extent possible, they remain in compliance with any and all laws governing such behavior.

Black hat hackers, on the other hand, may or may not be IT professionals but possess the knowledge and will to breach systems for profit. That profit may be monetary, street credibility, or just a source of entertainment. Black hat hackers do not ask permission and are not interested in helping their targets improve their network security.

In the middle of the spectrum are gray hat hackers, a group of people who may or may not be IT professionals and may or may not choose to break laws in pursuit of their hacking goals. Unlike black hat hackers, gray hats have no malicious intent in their actions; unlike white hats, they may not have obtained permission to perform the attack.
### **Insider Threats**
Some of the most potent threats come from people within your organization. Because they have legitimate access to systems, they are in a position to hack from the inside of the network, often undetected. Furthermore, a disgruntled insider may have a motive. Whenever you combine motive and opportunity, you have a substantially increased risk of trouble.

But not all insider threats are malicious in nature. Accidents happen, and if your account was granted extraordinary privileges, you could accidentally impact a large number of users with a single incorrect command. In both cases, the key to success is restricting access to the minimum set of permissions needed to perform the job and enable audit logging of all administrative actions so that you can later determine the cause of mysterious changes.
### **Nation States**
Industrial espionage is not just a theme for movies, it happens in real life on the internet. In a global economy, knowledge is power. Knowledge takes on many forms but is usually based on data or designs that companies refer to as intellectual property.

Consider an example of a fictitious country called Atlantica, positioned in the middle of the North Atlantic Ocean. Atlantica has a large labor force but almost no high-tech industry. Companies from wealthier countries have been building factories in Atlantica to take advantage of the inexpensive labor but have refused to share their intellectual property with other native Atlantica companies. Atlantica develops a plan to steal the intellectual property by hacking these more advanced companies so it can acquire the knowledge and designs it needs to kick out the foreign companies and produce the products itself.

While the example is extreme and perhaps unlikely, intellectual property theft through industrial espionage is a very real concern for many companies. The bigger threat is that *nation states* have substantially larger budgets to hire hackers than the average criminal enterprise.
### **Script Kiddies**
Script kiddies are the copycat criminals of the hacking community. They typically hack out of pure curiosity or entertainment and often use poorly documented tools or scripts written by much more advanced hackers. Script kiddies have no formal InfoSec training and are typically not IT professionals. It is this lack of knowledge that contributes to the unpredictability of their actions and the random levels of damage that results from their attacks.

Also, contrary to the name, script kiddies are typically not kids at all; they may be adults who recently learned a thing or two about security and now wish to try things out in the real world, not realizing the consequences of their actions.

A threat is someone who or something that can exploit a vulnerability to attack an asset. That means that a threat could be a person (knowingly or not), a software program, or even a natural disaster.

Threats and attacks are as numerous as vulnerabilities and come in just as many forms. Consider some of the common network attacks below, including eavesdropping methods, discovery techniques, service disruptions, and remote code execution.
### **Wiretapping**
This term comes from a historical technique used to spy on telephone calls. At the time, telephones transmitted analog electrical signals over copper wires that ultimately led to the telephone company. If an eavesdropper knew which wires belonged to a particular home or office, they could use a special telephone handset equipped with wire clips, or "taps," to listen in on the call. The process of clipping the taps to the telephone wires became known colloquially as "wiretapping"; today, it refers to any process that allows an attacker to electronically eavesdrop on a conversation, whether between two humans or two computers.

This form of attack can also include putting special wiretaps in-line with a computer’s network cable and then using a device called a "packet sniffer" to listen and record the traffic on the network. Alternatively, the attacker may put the wiretap in the wall behind a network jack. Wiretaps often use a wireless transmitter to send its ill-gotten information to the attacker’s computer. In cases where the security team might notice the attacker disconnecting the target device to add the wiretap, an attacker could use a special listening tool that interprets the electromagnetic field (EMF) surrounding a network cable so that the attacker can eavesdrop on a wire without even breaking its connection. To combat this problem, some organizations exclusively use fiber optic cables in their high-security areas. Though fiber optic cables are not immune to all wiretapping attacks, they are immune to EMF listening devices because fiber optic cables use photons (light) instead of electrons to transmit information.
### **Port Scanning**
When planning an attack, the attacker needs to know what type of services or applications are running on the victim’s computer. Fortunately for the attacker, this is easy because most network-accessible services open TCP ports to accept connections from legitimate client computers. An attacker just needs to send traffic to each and every port to learn which services are running. Unfortunately for the attacker, there are tens of thousands of ports, numbered from 0 to 65,535.

It was not long before tools made this job easier. An application called a "port scanner" can systematically check each of these ports by sending thousands of TCP/IP packets to the victim’s computer, each packet on a different TCP port. The victim’s computer will discard requests made to ports that are not assigned to a running application or service. The port scanner is then able to see which ports respond and which do not, allowing the attacker to perform more in-depth scanning to determine what service is running and if there are any known vulnerabilities present in that service.
### **Taking Control**
Once the attacker knows which ports are accepting traffic, the attacker can run standard vulnerability scanners against the victim’s computer to learn if any of the services can be easily exploited. This is yet another reason why you should routinely use a vulnerability scanner against your own servers. Even if you do not, attackers will.

Database servers are a popular target of attacks because they typically contain high-value information. But, more importantly, vulnerabilities are often found in applications that allow users to query databases. A particularly well-known attack called a SQL injection allows an attacker to take control of a database server by inserting special commands into input boxes instead of entering basic text. For example, you may have an application that allows a user to search for products by keyword. The application has a form that reads the keyword and then adds it to a Structured Query Language (SQL) command that is executed by the database server. So, instead of entering regular text, the user or attacker enters a specially crafted string of text that includes SQL commands designed to take control of the server. In a perfect world, the developer of the application would include code that validates the text that the user typed and would discard it if anything other than text was found. Unfortunately, there are many applications that do not check the input carefully and end up running nefarious SQL commands that compromise the security of the database server.

Another popular attack vector is a buffer overflow. Much like the SQL injection attack, this attack is made possible by applications that do not properly validate user input for extraneous content. In this case, the attacker purposefully enters text that is too large to fit within a region of memory called a "buffer." By entering more characters into the buffer than it can handle, some of those characters will overwrite neighboring, potentially executable areas of memory. This is not a regular or even random string of characters, though; it is compiled code that contains executable instructions that will grant the attacker control of the server. Under normal circumstances, the CPU of the server would simply ignore the compiled instructions; however, if the attacker correctly guesses the exact size of the memory buffer, the attacker can overflow it and trick the CPU into executing the rogue instructions.

There are two main protections against these attacks. The first is to review your source code and verify that all user input fields are checked for robust or unplanned values. Second, enable the NX-bit (no-execute) functionality on the physical computer or VM to tag memory buffers as containing storage (data) or CPU instructions (code). With the NX-bit enabled, the CPU will only execute the contents of memory buffers identified as code.
### **Spoofing**
Hacking a server and taking control of it may get noticed quickly, so attackers may prefer the more subtle approach of eavesdropping to gain the information they desire. Unfortunately for the attacker, eavesdropping is becoming much more difficult due to advances in networking, such as the Ethernet switch. To gain access to the information, the attacker needs to get into the middle of the conversation; however, to do so, the attacker must impersonate the sender and receiver of the traffic. This act is known as "spoofing its identity."

Consider as an example a man-in-the-middle attack. An attacker wants to intercept the communication between a client computer (client) and a server. The attacker will likely use two network interfaces, one that is spoofed to look like the server and another to look like the client. When the real client attempts to contact the server, the attacker’s computer responds to the client and captures the request. The attacker then replays that connection request from their computer using the network interface that has been spoofed to appear as the client. The server exchanges information with the attacker believing the attacker is the client, and then the attacker forwards the response back to the actual client so that no one notices the break in connection. There are many variants of spoofing. Another example involves ARP poisoning, which is a method attackers use to cause an Ethernet switch to flood all traffic to every port on the switch, including the attacker’s computer.
### **Denial-of-Service (DOS)**
Threats are not restricted to data loss or gaining unauthorized access to data. There are also threats that make data or entire systems unavailable to anyone. Threats known as denial-of-service (DoS) attacks do just that: they deny someone access to a service, usually by overwhelming the victim with enormous amounts of useless traffic.

Many DoS attacks use features within the ICMP, such as "ping." You may recall that ping is a tool commonly used by network administrators to verify that a computer is online. When you ping a computer, your computer sends the remote computer an ICMP echo-request packet, which essentially asks the remote computer to reply back to you. When the remote computer receives the echo-request packet, it automatically responds back to the source address with an ICMP echo-reply packet. Herein lies the problem: attackers learned that they could forge the source address of the echo-request, making the target computer believe the request came from another location and correspondingly send its echo-reply packets to another computer rather than the attacker. This redirection allows the attacker to continue attacking with minimal stress on the attacker's computer.

This opened the door for a number of attacks, some of which no longer function due to fixes made within the TCP/IP network stack on modern computers and routers. The first was the ping of death, a trick whereby the attacker would send the victim a malformed ICMP packet that would cause the victim’s computer to crash or stop functioning on the network. After the ping of death was patched, a new attack called the "ping flood" took its place.

The ping flood attack overwhelms a victim’s computer with an immense volume of ICMP echo-request packets, all containing a forged, randomized source address. The victim’s computer automatically begins sending ICMP echo-reply packets to all these forged source addresses, which eventually overwhelms the victim’s computer so that it cannot do its normal job. Fortunately, even though the source address is forged, this type of attack typically can be stopped and sometimes even prevented. Its big brother, the "Smurf attack," however, is significantly more difficult to stop and prevent.

The Smurf attack is a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack, which means that instead of one computer sending forged packets to a victim, in the Smurf attack potentially thousands of computers will bombard the victim. The difference is subtle but important. In the ping flood, the attacker sends an ICMP echo-request with a forged source address to the victim, forcing it to send a corresponding echo-reply packet to a random computer. In the Smurf attack, the attacker sends a forged ICMP echo-request packet to the broadcast address of a large IP subnet, which means that a massive number of computers would all receive the message. Instead of randomizing the source address as in the ping flood attack, in the Smurf attack, the attacker specifies the victim’s address as the source address. As each of the hundreds or thousands of computers receives the ICMP echo-request packet, each will respond by sending an ICMP echo-reply packet to the victim’s address, thereby crippling its network connection.

There are also other DDoS attacks that aim to exhaust a computer’s CPU or network connections, including SSL attacks, which cause the victim’s computer to consume excessive CPU time as it constantly sets up and tears down thousands of SSL encryption sessions over and over.
### **Social Engineering**
Trust is a weakness, at least in the InfoSec world. It is usually substantially easier to "hack a human" than hack a computer because people are generally trusting of others. This leads to a class of attack known as "social engineering," the art of manipulating human trust to gain access or information. Here are some examples.

- Impersonation:
  - You overlook or just do not report the person resembling an electrician who is working on a nearby wall outlet. (He is actually installing listening devices on your network cables.)
  - The helpdesk resets a user's password over the phone without being able to recognize the person's voice. (It was an imposter who can now log in as that user.)
  - You hold the door open for a man dressed in a courier's outfit who seems to be carrying very heavy boxes into the office. (The boxes contain his computer and additional hacking tools.)
- Phishing:
  - You answer phone or email surveys or sales calls that discuss the type or brand of your security devices or policies. (They were assessing your security posture and checking how difficult your defenses would be to overcome.)
  - You click links in emails from the IT department asking you to test a new web-based email that of course requires you to log in. (The email was fake and the web page is a phishing site that collects usernames and passwords.)
  - You accept that free USB drive from a new vendor and plug it into your computer. (The drive contains a stealth phishing tool that reports your keystrokes back to the hacker.)

One of the largest jobs in SecOps is managing the risk of attacks and acting both proactively to prevent or mitigate the damage and reactively to stop the attack and repair the damage.
### **Honeypot**
A honeypot is a server or device that is configured to look very authentic, potentially containing data that appears to be legitimate user data, or configuration files that seem authentic. It is also known as a "tar pit" because it is intended to attract or distract would-be attackers from the actual targets on the network. The goal of the honeypot is to provide a false positive for hackers, whereby the attacker breaches the honeypot and believes the data it contains is the target’s actual data.

An alternate use of the honeypot or tar pit servers is to collect data on the attacker. A tar pit server is similar to a honeypot in that it contains data that is fictitious; however, the tar pit server is also designed to slow down the attacker so that tracing information can be obtained by the intrusion detection system (IDS).
### **Proactive and Preventive Measures**
Think about the number of threats and attacks discussed in this course. Aside from powering off your computers, it is difficult to imagine a solution that could protect a network from all the possible attacks and attackers. Security is not a task that you check off on a list, but rather a constant process to be performed. It is like a perpetual game of cat and mouse.

To combat these problems you need to take an in-depth defense approach to network security. That means you will use multiple tools and methods together in an overlapping manner to create rings or layers of security. If one component is compromised, there should be at least one other obstacle to overcome before the attacker gains access to the system. Ideally, you will mix different methods of defense, such as using an application-aware firewall on the perimeter and then relying on an intrusion prevention system (IPS) within the network and firewall and anti-malware software on the servers.

Minimize your exposure by keeping your operating systems and applications up to date on patches. Additionally, follow security-hardening guides that help you remove unnecessary services and features that may be susceptible to attack.
### **Risk Mitigation Response**
If a virus is spreading throughout the network, you will not have time to develop a plan and then act on it. So, be sure to develop and test your containment plans before an attack occurs. The response plan should first help contain the damage from the attack, which may involve quarantining computers or severing network connections, and then work to remove the threat and clean up the damage.

Remember that some attacks are silent and may not cause obvious damage right away. Such is the case with rootkits, backdoor attacks, and Trojan horses. Run complete antivirus and anti-malware scans on your systems regularly and keep the virus definitions as up-to-date as possible to help you detect new and emerging threats.

### **Wireless Attacks**
While the security standards and encryption algorithms discussed above may prevent most wireless network attacks, there are some attacks that remain challenging. Unlike cabled networks that require an attacker to gain physical access to wiring before the attacker can cause trouble, you may not even see the attacker in a wireless network. The attacker only needs to be within range of a WAP, which may have a range of hundreds of feet. Your attacker may be sitting comfortably in their car while hacking your network.

*Diagram: Denial of Service (DoS) Attack*
### **Deauth Attack**
Deauthentication (abbreviated deauth) is a denial-of-service (DoS) attack where the attacker can force any client (or even every client) off of the network. Worse yet, the attacker does not even need to be on the network they are attacking. That is right, the attacker can kick anyone off the network without even joining that wireless network. But what is the point? Users can simply reconnect. While that is true, there are several reasons an attacker might want to perform a deauth attack:

- To prevent access to the network (the main point of any DoS attack)
- To force users to reconnect and have them connect to the attacker’s access point instead (see Fake Access section for more details)
- To capture the 4-way handshake of WPA to gain intelligence that allows the attacker to hack into the WAP to gain access to the corporate network

The simplest defense is to use WPA3 security on your WAPs because in WPA3, the management packets are encrypted. If it is not possible to use WPA3, at least use WPA2 to make sure the data traffic is encrypted. Just be aware that you are being targeted, so you should consider upgrading your wireless network so that it can operate using WPA3 security. Additionally, use a long, complex passphrase to gain access to the network. The passphrase should contain upper and lower case letters, numbers, and special characters.
### **Fake Access**
In this attack type, an attacker sets up an illegitimate wireless network using their own WAP and may even share their own cellular data to create an internet hotspot. The attacker usually opens this network without any security or authentication so as to entice people in a hurry to connect to the attacker’s rogue WAP.

When the unwitting victim connects to the rogue WAP, the attacker becomes privy to all the data the victim’s computer sends or receives. This also means the attacker could redirect the data to a different location, or even modify the contents of the data. Any unencrypted traffic is plainly visible to the attacker—usernames and passwords, credit cards, or any other data not already encrypted. This attack is very easy to set up, requires little technical expertise, and can yield a lot of information for the attacker.

If you must use unsecured networks, create a virtual private network (VPN) tunnel on your device that connects to a VPN service at your office. The VPN will encrypt all traffic sent and received over the wireless network. But the best defense against this kind of attack is to train your employees to never use unsecured Wi-Fi hotspots, like the one you clicked on to send that email at the airport.