In cryptography terms, unencrypted data is referred to as being sent or stored in the clear, meaning that the data can be read by anyone who intercepts the communication or accesses the unencrypted file. Encrypted data is referred to as ciphertext because the proper term for an encryption algorithm is a cipher. These ciphers come in many forms and rely on different types of keys to encrypt and decrypt the data.

If the cipher uses the same key to encrypt the data as it does to decrypt the data, the cipher is said to use a symmetric key. Conversely, if the keys are different, the cipher is said to use an asymmetric key pair, one key to encrypt the data and another to decrypt it.

Encryption uses several kinds of algorithms. Two commonly used methods are symmetric encryption and asymmetric encryption.

Symmetric encryption uses a key to encrypt and decrypt data. Think of the front door to your house. You use one key to lock and unlock the door; the same key does both tasks; this is similar to how a symmetric key works. An example of symmetric encryption is the Advanced Encryption Standard or AES. AES has several versions, such as AES-128 and AES-256. AES-256 is traditionally used today in most enterprise-type applications, such as banking or credit cards. AES is a symmetric key that allows encrypting and decrypting data with the same key.

Asymmetric encryption, on the other hand, uses two different keys to access data. An example is a Secure Sockets Layer or SSL. In the internet Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure or https, the S stands for Secure Sockets Layer. Here the sender and the user use two different keys to access data. However, because SSL has some inherent vulnerability that hackers tried to exploit, Transport Layer Security or TLS has replaced SSL. Although it’s still called https, technically, no one uses SSL. TLS comes in multiple versions—1.0, 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3. The incremental numbering shows the latest version. Another example of asymmetric encryption is Internet Protocol Security or IPsec; it is often used for encryption of traffic in-flight on an existing network. The two keys or key pairs used in asymmetric encryption involve a public key and a private key. Together they are used to set the encryption. The public at large holds the public key in traditional encryption. An example is VeriSign. When you go to a website that has an associated secure sockets layer— TLS—certificate designed just for encryption, its certificate will be published by a well-known provider. Your browser will look, recognize VeriSign, and quickly check to see if the certificate is still valid. If so, the server will have a private key that is known only to that server. The server will then use its private key to go back and sign the communication.

Symmetric encryption often works in tandem with asymmetric encryption. For example, after the initial key exchange, AES runs behind the scenes to encrypt the data back and forth. This process is a common way of doing encryption with a public-private key pair. In addition to the previous encryption examples, key pairs are found in things like digital signatures. For instance, DocuSign uses a public and private key pair, with the public key held by the other organizations that want to verify the signature and the private key held by the person signing the key, or the actual document. We also use public-private key pairs to log into systems such as Linux.

To summarize, symmetric and asymmetric algorithms are standard methods of encryption. Symmetric encryption is simply one key, while asymmetric encryption uses public-private key pairs. Both types of encryption are often used together.
### **Symmetric Key Encryption**
Symmetric key encryption, also known as private key encryption, uses the same key to encrypt the data as it does to decrypt the data, meaning that when used for data transmissions, symmetric key encryption requires that both the sender and the receiver possess the same cipher key.

Encryption is ciphering data before transmitting it to the intended recipients to prevent interceptors from reading it. The intended recipients have a decryption key to decipher the data. Two commonly used methods of encrypting data are symmetric encryption and asymmetric encryption.

In symmetric encryption, a key management system, or KMS, also known by other names, generates a key. This key combines with the data, such as plain text, Word documents, spreadsheets, and audio or video files, to encrypt it. The encrypted data is then stored in a system along with the key. This would seem like keeping your house key in the deadbolt lock—convenient but insecure. However, the KMS generates a master key to encrypt the key that is stored with the data. The master key does not leave the KMS to prevent it from being corrupted, stolen, or viewed during transmission. With the key that is stored with the data being encrypted, anyone breaking into the storage will not be able to decrypt the data. To be able to retrieve the data into usable form, you need to get the encrypted data and the encrypted key out of the storage and into the KMS. The KMS will then use the master key to decrypt the data, so that you have the symmetric key and the encrypted data. You can then use the key to decrypt the data into its original form.

The final consideration in this process is protecting the master key, also called the key-encryption key, from being lost or compromised. The solution is to encrypt the master key with another one, and then encrypt that one with a third through the key encryption hierarchy. While it is possible to have numerous keys, the number generally does not go beyond more than three or four keys because it is necessary to break one key to get to the next. The system rotates these keys periodically, meaning the odds of any of them getting compromised are small. To summarize, symmetric encryption is a means of securing data. It requires a key management system, master key, symmetric key, and storage.

The security of the encryption depends heavily on the complexity of the cipher and the key, but this is usually not the weakest link. The sender and receiver must somehow exchange the secret key with each other before encrypting any data. It is during this key exchange that the encryption is most vulnerable. If an attacker were to intercept the key, the attacker could decrypt the data and even send a forged message by re-encrypting the data using that same key. You may have used symmetric key encryption in the past. Consider a group of classmates plotting to exchange secret notes in class. They first agree upon a cipher, such as changing each letter to another letter. Then they agree upon a key, such as the number of letters before or after the original letter. With that information, you could both encrypt and decrypt the messages. Unfortunately for these classmates, not only is the cipher simple to determine, but the key is easy to guess, having only 26 possible combinations.

*Diagram. Symmetric key encryption.*

This does not mean that symmetric encryption is weak. A sufficiently complex cipher and key can keep data secret for a long time. For example, in World War II the German army used a symmetric key cipher in their Enigma machine, an advanced cryptograph that incorporated the date into the key, rendering the code unbreakable by Allied forces for years.

In addition to its simplicity, the other advantage to symmetric key ciphers is the speed at which they can calculate the encryption and decryption sequences. When encrypting a large amount of data, it is significantly faster to encrypt the data using a symmetric key cipher than an asymmetric key cipher, but as with the Enigma machine, if given enough time and computing power, the key will be eventually compromised, and the code broken.
### **Asymmetric Key Encryption**
Asymmetric key ciphers rely on two different keys to encrypt and decrypt the traffic. This is particularly useful on the internet where the encryption of the data being sent to and from e-commerce and banking websites is needed. The customers have no reliable and secure means to exchange a secret key prior to the data transfer, so public key infrastructure (PKI) is relied upon.

PKI is an asymmetric key solution that allows two parties to exchange encrypted data without having first exchanged a private or shared key with one another. In PKI systems, each party that could either send or receive encrypted data must first create a key pair consisting of a public key and a private key. The key pair is created using an algorithm that enables one key to decrypt ciphertext that the other key has encrypted. Once the pair is created, the public key is published to a public repository, whereas the private key is kept secret by the owner of the key. If you wish to send this person an encrypted file, you would retrieve their public key from the internet and then use it to encrypt the file. You could then send the encrypted file to the person or even post it for them to download. The only way to decrypt the file is to use the recipient’s private key, which should be stored in a very safe place.

In addition to encrypting data for secrecy, PKI can also be used for nonrepudiation and to verify the validity and integrity of data that was sent. If you encrypt a file using your own private key, the data can be decrypted by anyone who can download your public key. This is not a security breach, it is a feature known as a digital signature. By encrypting the data, you create a ciphertext block that cannot be decrypted if it is altered after you signed it, thereby guaranteeing that the data has not changed since you signed it.

One downside to asymmetric key ciphers is the computational power required to perform the encryption on large blocks of data. This has led to a hybrid use of symmetric and asymmetric ciphers in bulk data encryption as well as for data encrypted in transit. Transport Layer Security (TLS) encryption, as well as bulk data encryption, is performed using a symmetric key to optimize its speed, but that key is exchanged using an asymmetric key cipher to ensure perfect secrecy of the key exchange. In this way, you get the best of both worlds: speed and security.

*Diagram. Asymmetric key encryption.*
### **Elliptic Curve Cryptography**
*Diagram. Example of elliptic curve cryptography.*

One of the weaknesses of PKI is that it is based on mathematical formulas. With modern computers able to process incredibly complex equations, the secrecy of these keys became very uncertain. In order to add complexity to the keys that defies current brute force attack methods, a new breed of asymmetric key creation was unveiled: elliptic curve cryptography (ECC). ECC uses the algebraic structure of elliptic curves to create a key that is even smaller than traditional asymmetric keys, yet it is substantially more difficult to crack without the aid of quantum computers.

You encrypt and decrypt data every day of your life. It could be when connecting to banking or healthcare websites or when you connect to your corporate network via a virtual private network (VPN) tunnel, as you will learn more about in this lesson. Encryption comes in a variety of forms and is used to protect data flowing through a network or when the data is stored on a disk. Data moving through a network is known as data in transit, while data that resides on a disk is known as data at rest. When the data is both encrypted in transit and at rest, you have end-to-end encryption. End-to-end encryption means that the data is never stored or transmitted in the clear.
### **SSL/TLS Encryption**
*Diagram. How SSL/TLS encryption works.*

Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and Transport Layer Security (TLS) are the most common forms of encryption found on the internet today. Though SSL was deprecated in 2015, TLS provides similar functionality with more robust security. TLS creates a secure channel over the internet between a client computer and a server by exchanging a public key in the form of a certificate. The certificate is issued by a registered and well-known certificate authority (CA), such as Verisign. The certificate has a public key that is stored on the webserver and presented to the public whenever a user connects to the website. The private key is also stored on the webserver but is kept secret and protected.

When a client computer (the web browser) contacts the webserver, the client initiates an encryption handshake that establishes a symmetric key that will be used to encrypt their traffic. The key exchange starts with the client computer encrypting a token with the webserver’s public key. This ensures that only a computer holding the private key, the webserver, can decrypt the token. The webserver then decrypts the token using its private key, and then uses the token as a private key in the symmetric key cipher with the client, thereby ensuring both sides of the communication and the key exchange remain encrypted.
### **IPSec Encryption**
*Diagram. How IPSec encryption works.*Diagram Description

Internet protocol security (IPsec) provides an authentication and encryption solution that secures IP network traffic at Layer 3 of the OSI model. This is in contrast to the TLS protocol discussed above, which operates at Layer 6. TLS also differs in that it provides a PKI encryption method commonly used to encrypt web pages or data sent between one client and one server. IPsec, on the other hand, is commonly used to create virtual private network (VPN) tunnels across the internet or other untrusted networks to allow many computers to communicate with each other.

Though it is possible to have a client-to-server IPsec VPN tunnel, they are more often found in site-to-site configurations between devices, such as firewalls or routers. By terminating the encryption on a network device instead of a client computer or server, the computers are freed from the burden of encrypting and decrypting their traffic when communicating across the tunnel.

IPsec traffic is encapsulated and authenticated, which allows the devices to create an encrypted tunnel that traffic may pass through. This encapsulation hides the fact that the packets are flowing across an untrusted network, such as the internet, and gives the client computers the illusion that they are directly connected to one another or at least within the same network.

IPsec is composed of the Authentication Header (AH) protocol, which provides data integrity for the connection, the encapsulating security payload (ESP), which provides encryption for the connection, and the security associations (SA), which define the algorithms to be used and the key exchange method. IPsec is often used with internet key exchange (IKE) and IKEv2, though it is also possible to use IPsec with symmetric keys (more often called pre-shared keys because both devices must be configured to use the same key during the VPN negotiation process).
### **Common Data-at-Risk Algorithms**
When data is stored in a permanent or semi-permanent state, the data is said to be at rest. Data at rest should be treated with the same level of care as data in transit because servers and their components can be physically stolen or compromised in such a way that the data is left in the clear and exposed to attackers.
### **Advanced Encryption Standard**
You may have guessed from the earlier lessons that for bulk encryption of data, the preferred choice of ciphers would be a symmetric key algorithm. Currently, the most secure algorithm for storing and encrypting data at rest is the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), a symmetric key cipher that makes use of different key and block sizes and creates a near-impenetrable encryption. AES modifies the plaintext input by performing a series of transformations on the data to create ciphertext. Depending on the key length, as many as 14 transformations can be made against a given block of data, making it exceptionally difficult, if not impossible, to reverse the encryption without the key or the aid of quantum computers.
### **Data Security**
Data classification, access control, data protection, and encryption all play a role in protecting data and collectively affect an organization's decision to adopt a particular cloud deployment model. Some cloud providers' backend architecture is more isolated from the public internet, while others leverage the already widespread access to the public internet. However, relying on the public internet may introduce regulatory or security concerns. This is just one of many aspects that should be considered when adopting any cloud deployment for an organization.
### **Data Classification**
*Diagram. Hierarchy of data classification.*

Whether you are storing data in a private or public cloud, it is equally important to identify the types of data that you are storing and to create policies that describe how to handle the data. These policies may include the length of time the data is permitted to exist, its security sensitivity, and any requirements that dictate the physical or geographic location where the data must reside.

Retention policies dictate how long a piece of data should remain available, whether in active day-to-day storage or in archive copies. Some types of data, such as financial transactions or security audit logs, must be kept for extended periods of time, although they may not be viewed often (or ever). Storing data for a shorter (or longer) time than permitted can result in serious fines. Many public cloud providers offer storage solutions that include data retention policies that can protect data from accidental erasure and then automatically delete it when the retention period lapses.

Your company may deem some data too sensitive to be stored within a public cloud provider. Therefore, you will need to set aside a location within your private cloud or corporate data center to house such data. In other cases, your data may be subject to data residency requirements that stipulate the physical or geographical location where the data must reside. Data residency requirements are occasionally seen in government organizations where public records may not leave the state or territory where the information was obtained.
### **Data Protection**
A common misconception is that data stored in the public cloud is automatically backed up and can be restored at any time. The reality is that your data is typically not automatically backed up by the cloud provider. That can also be true of private clouds. Always check with the provider to determine if a backup of your data exists, and if so, how often it is created, how long it is kept, and how you can retrieve it. If a cloud provider does automatically back up your data, be sure to include the length of time the backup copy is available when determining your data retention policies.

When working in a hybrid environment, you may consider backing up your public cloud data to your corporate data center. However, be warned that this could be a very expensive decision. Though most public cloud providers do not charge for data transfers into their cloud, most providers charge network transfer fees for all data leaving their cloud. Data backups from the cloud to your on-premises data center could include a very large amount of data each night. On the other hand, you may opt to take advantage of the free inbound traffic (if offered) to back up your private cloud to the public cloud.

Regardless of your backup solution plan, be sure to test it regularly. In fact, consider automating a restore process once a week to check for failures or inconsistencies in the backup.
### **Encryption of Data at Rest**
You should strongly consider encrypting all your data at rest, even if you own the server or storage hardware, as is often the case with private clouds. This is especially true for data in public clouds where you do not directly control the physical access to the servers that contain your data. Data encryption at rest provides a physical safeguard for your data because even if the server is stolen and physically removed from the datacenter, the data remains protected and inaccessible to the attacker.

Remember that encryption is only as good as the strength and security of the encryption keys. When encrypting data at rest, you must also consider how you will manage the encryption keys that are used to encrypt and decrypt your data. The key used to encrypt and decrypt your data is called a data encryption key (DEK). If an attacker obtains the DEK, the attacker can decrypt and access your data. Worse yet, the attacker may be able to decrypt the data, modify it, and then re-encrypt it without your knowledge.

Since an attacker obtaining the DEK is the vulnerability, the mitigation must be to prevent the attacker from doing so. You can do so in one of two ways. You could rotate or change the DEK regularly so that even if the DEK were compromised the attacker would have a limited time where the key was useful. Alternatively, you could seek a method that does not require you to disclose the DEK to anyone, and yet still encrypt and decrypt the data using that DEK. While the second option sounds impossible, it is actually the best choice. Changing the DEK used to encrypt data is a time intensive process because it requires you to first decrypt the data using the original DEK, then encrypt the data using the new DEK. If you have more than a few terabytes of data, this will take a very long time and incur a significant amount of CPU processing time to complete each time you change the keys.

That leaves you with the seemingly impossible option: never disclose the DEK. But how can you encrypt or decrypt data if no one has access to the DEK? The answer is simple, you will protect the DEK in the same way that you protect your other data files, encrypt it. When you encrypt the DEK, you use an asymmetric encryption key called a key encryption key (KEK). To help keep all these keys organized, you will store the encrypted DEK inside a key management server (KMS) that grants access to the key based on the validity of your KEK.

That is a bit complex, so consider the following analogy. Imagine that you have a secret decoder ring that you wish to lock up and protect within a vault. The secret decoder ring is your DEK and is used whenever you have a piece of data that must be encrypted or decrypted. The vault is the KMS, and the key to the vault is your personal KEK. Periodically you will change the locks on the vault to safeguard against KEK theft. Fortunately, that will not affect your secret decoder ring (the DEK). The DEK is still used to encrypt all your data, but the DEK is only ever disclosed in its encrypted form. When it is time to encrypt or decrypt data, your computer uses the KEK to temporarily unlock the DEK, which is then passed to the storage system to enable the encryption or decryption process.

Many public cloud providers offer a KMS for your encryption keys. This is also referred to as managed key encryption because your encryption keys are managed by the KMS.

Encryption of data at rest can also safeguard against accidents such as exposing data after a server has been decommissioned. For example, consider a server that is no longer needed and is then removed from the network without first performing a full security wipe of its hard drive. If the data on that hard drive was not encrypted, it may still be readable and end up in the wrong hands when the server is later sold or repurposed.
### **Encryption of Data in Transit**
It is equally important to encrypt your data in transit, also known as data in flight. Again, while beneficial in a private cloud environment, it is particularly important for public and hybrid clouds due to the potential for accidental data exposure on shared network links. Even in private clouds, the prevalence of malware makes data encryption important to protect against data theft or the manipulation of data in transit. In the case of a hybrid cloud, the wide area network (WAN) link, which connects the private and public clouds, should also be encrypted.
### **Application Security**
If you are developing a web application that will require internet users to create credentials for your application, consider instead using an authentication service known as federated identity management. Federated identity management allows internet users to authenticate to your application using federated identity servers at Google, Facebook, Twitter, and other sites where they may already have an account.

To clarify federated identity management, consider the example of a user named Bob, who wishes to log on to your web application. Bob visits your web application and notices that he can log on to your application using his Google ID. When Bob clicks the Google authentication button, his browser is temporarily redirected to Google, where he is prompted to log in using his Google credentials. After Google confirms Bob’s identity through a correct password exchange, the Google federated identity services send to your server a special token that uniquely identifies Bob, but does not disclose any of Bob’s private information. If Bob logs on again, Google will send you the same token value. This means that, instead of requiring Bob to create a unique username and password within your application, your application can rely on the value of the federated identity token to uniquely identify Bob when he logs on again in the future. Federated identity management relieves you from the security risk and liability of hosting a database of usernames and passwords, and it frees Bob from the burden of memorizing yet another username and password.
### **Access Control**
Once you have classified your data, you should determine who requires access to the data and to what degree they should have access. For instance, you may have data that everyone, even anonymous internet users, should be able to read and access but not change. Regardless of public or private cloud, always assign users the least amount of access required, and whenever possible, assign the permissions to groups instead of individual user accounts.

In private clouds, you can assign permissions to data using internal security authorization controls, such as Windows or Linux file server permissions assigned to users or groups found in your Microsoft Active Directory listing. In public clouds, you may or may not have the ability to assign users and groups to the cloud storage locations. This is dependent upon the cloud provider and the way you have integrated your authentication and authorization systems with the cloud provider's identity and access management (IAM) services.

When working in hybrid cloud environments, you should first configure the public and private cloud providers to use the same IAM configuration. This standardizes the user and group names across the clouds before assigning permissions to the data, which in turn helps avoid accidentally assigning extra (or insufficient) permissions due to user or group naming similarities and inconsistencies.
### **Network Security**
Publicly accessible servers on the internet are constantly exposed to attack and, when compromised, can allow an attacker to launch additional attacks inside your network from the comfort of the attacker's newly hacked server. The best plan is to isolate these public-facing servers whenever possible to minimize the damage an attack can have on your network. For example, consider hosting the server in a public cloud or within an extranet in your private cloud. An extranet is a secured region of your private network where firewalls are configured to carefully inspect traffic entering and leaving the network, and on occasion, intrusion prevention systems (IPS) are implemented within the extranet to mitigate any server-to-server attacks within the extranet.

Though you probably have a firewall facing the internet within your private cloud, you may or may not have a dedicated firewall at the public cloud provider. In either case, remember that security is a process of adding layers or barriers, and you should enable and carefully configure the operating system firewall on all your servers, even those not directly exposed to the internet. The reason for the extra security is to protect against an attacker that breached one layer of your defenses.

At some point, you will need to manage your cloud-based servers. In a private cloud, you can likely perform the administration using a private network. However, unless you are operating in a hybrid cloud environment, your public servers should be behind a firewall and not directly reachable. Instead of opening remote administrative ports or services to the internet, consider establishing a virtual private network (VPN) or a dedicated wide area network (WAN) connection to your public cloud provider to allow you to manage the servers as you would in a private cloud environment.
### **Cloud Platform Security**
Cloud providers, both private and public, require a form of authentication to prove your identity and include authorization rules, such as IAM, to control what you may access. Additionally, some cloud providers may offer the ability to enable multifactor authentication (MFA) to further verify your identity. MFA is an extra step beyond a username and password. The term multifactor authentication stems from the idea that you will authenticate using different methods, namely something you know (a username and password) and either something you are (fingerprints or other biometric data) or something you have (a token or device). While private cloud providers may be able to handle biometrics as a part of your MFA configuration, most public cloud providers rely on a token or device that generates a special numeric personal identification number (PIN), which you must enter upon logging on. This token may be a keychain-like device called a key fob, or you may be able to use your mobile phone by using a virtual authenticator application that generates the PIN. In either case, this additional form of identification helps ensure that if your username and password are compromised, the attacker would still need to have access to your token or your biometrics to gain access to your account.

Humans can log in using usernames and passwords, but when an application needs to access resources within a cloud provider, it typically uses something known as a service account. These accounts are similar to regular user accounts, but they do not have passwords, and you cannot use the accounts to log in to the cloud provider’s administrative portal. The service accounts are authenticated using special strings of characters known as application programming interface (API) keys. If you have an application that requires special access to a service within the cloud provider, you could configure the application to authenticate using the service account and API key instead of hard coding a human’s username and password combination into the application.

Security would not be complete without the ability to audit the actions that users and services take throughout the course of their normal operation. Public cloud providers keep detailed audit logs of the actions taken within their system to help you account for changes and to discover any unauthorized use of privileged credentials. Typically, after you enable and configure the logging, the public cloud providers retain these audit logs for one year, though you may be able to export them and save them for a longer duration. Private cloud providers may or may not provide detailed audit logging. The level of audit logging in a private cloud is usually based on corporate governance policies and regulatory compliance requirements.

The list of security protocols here (3DES and AES) are in order from weakest to strongest—you should always use AES if at all possible. The implementation of wireless encryption standards is also listed in order from weakest to strongest (WEP to WPA3).

||**WEP**|**WPA**|**WPA2**|**WPA3**|
| :- | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
|**Brief description**|Ensure wired-like privacy in wireless|Based on 802.11i without requirement for new hardware|All mandatory 802.11i features and a new hardware|Announced by Wi-Fi Alliance|
|**Encryption**|RC4|TKIP + RC4|CCMP/AES|GCMP-256|
|**Authentication**|<p>WEP-Open</p><p>WEP-Shared</p>|<p>WPA-PSK</p><p>WPA-Enterprise</p>|<p>WPA2-Personal</p><p>WPA2-Enterprise</p>|<p>WPA3-Personal</p><p>WPA3-Enterprise</p>|
|**Data integrity**|CRC-32|MIC algorithm|Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code (based on AES)|256-bit Broadcast/Multicast Integrity Protocol Galois Message Authentication Code (BIP-GMAC-256)|
|**Key management**|none|4-way handshake|4-way handshake|Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) exchange and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)|
### **3DES**
Triple DES (often abbreviated 3DES) is a symmetric encryption algorithm that uses the now antiquated DES (data encryption standard) algorithm three times in a row to encrypt your data. The DES algorithm uses only 56-bit encryption and can be compromised by brute force software running on modern hardware in less than a day. By utilizing multiple independent keys, 3DES increases the overall complexity of the encryption, but the encryption can still be compromised. In fact, the chance that an attacker can figure out the keys increases as you send more data in a single 3DES session. NIST, Microsoft, and many others have phased out the use of DES and 3DES, but there are still organizations and standards that use them. Also, some Wi-Fi networks still support it for backward compatibility with older devices.
### **AES**
The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) is considered a very secure form of encryption today, although, with advances in computing power and quantum computing, it may not be considered secure forever. AES can be used with a 128-bit, 192-bit, or 256-bit key. Longer key lengths are exponentially harder to crack, but they also increase the amount of computing power required to encrypt the data. Today, most devices and websites use the 256-bit version (AES-256).

The AES standard, like 3DES and DES, is a symmetric key algorithm. One advantage of most modern processors is that they support hardware acceleration via the CPU instruction set called AES-NI (AES New Instructions). These instructions allow the CPU to process AES encryption at very fast speeds, potentially upward of 10 GB per second. This, in turn, allows a computer to encrypt its wireless network traffic using AES and then transmit it at native wireless speeds with minimal, if any, effect on performance.
### **WEP**
Wired equivalent privacy (WEP) was part of the first wireless standards proposed by the IEEE in 1997. As the name suggests, the idea was to provide the same level of security as a wired network for wireless networks. A WEP key is either 10 or 26 hexadecimal digits. Each hexadecimal digit is 4 bits. Therefore, the bit length of the encryption key is either 40-bit or 104-bit, both of which can be compromised in under a day using brute force methods on standard workstation hardware. Because all packets are encrypted by that key, WEP is very vulnerable to attack today. In 2003, the Wi-Fi Alliance, a group that certifies interoperability of devices, stated that WEP had been superseded by Wi-Fi protected access (WPA). The Wi-Fi Alliance later deprecated WEP in 2004.
### **WPA**
Wi-Fi protected access (WPA), and the subsequent standards WPA2 and WPA3 described below, were defined by the Wi-Fi Alliance and the IEEE to overcome the weaknesses of WEP. WPA was designed as a short-term bridge between the original WEP standard and the more secure IEEE 802.11i standard, which was finalized in 2004 (now known as WPA2). WPA is based on the draft IEEE 802.11i standard that was released in 2003.

One of the most noticeable differences between WEP and WPA is the key used to access the wireless network. Where WEP relies on a fixed-length hexadecimal preshared key, WPA uses a variable-length alphanumeric passphrase, which can range from 8 to 63 characters in length.

Another subtler, but even more powerful, upgrade for WPA is the addition of an encryption process known as temporal key integrity protocol (TKIP). Unlike WEP where all packets on the network are encrypted using the same encryption key, TKIP gives WPA a significant security boost by generating a new 128-bit encryption key for every packet sent on the network. This means that instead of cracking one key to decrypt the traffic, an attacker must crack potentially millions of keys. That said, over time, several flaws and weaknesses have been found in the WPA protocol, which prompted the release of WPA2 and then WPA3.
### **WPA2**
Introduced in 2004 by the Wi-Fi Alliance, WPA2 quickly became the standard for wireless security for the next 15 years. The major difference between WPA2 and the original WPA is the mandatory support for Counter Mode Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol (CCMP for short), which is part of the AES encryption standard. It is designed to provide data confidentiality, authentication, and access control to the network. Eventually, WPA2 developed weaknesses that led to the development of WPA3 as its replacement.
### **WPA3**
WPA3 was released in January 2018 to address the weaknesses of WPA2. Specifically, it increases the minimum key strength to 192-bits for enterprise mode connections, which are often used in organizations instead of the alternate personal mode available in WPA standards.

A much more noticeable change in WPA3 is the elimination of the passphrase or key that WEP, WPA, and WPA2 use to allow computers to join a personal-mode wireless network. In WPA3, all devices now use the simultaneous authentication of equals (SAE) method to exchange the network key as defined in the IEEE 802.11-2016 standard. The SAE method ensures the initial key exchange in personal mode is more secure by eliminating the need to tell others the key before they connect to the network.

WPA3 also implements another method known as forward secrecy or perfect forward secrecy (PFS), which ensures that even if one session key is compromised, that compromised key will only affect data exchanged in that encryption session, not in any past or future sessions.

One other improvement in this standard, as defined in the 802.11w specification, is the encryption of management frames, such as de-associating from the network (see Deauth Attack section below for an exploit of this behavior in networks without WPA3). This is only possible once encryption has been established, so devices are still vulnerable to management frame attacks prior to the session encryption negotiation.

All new devices and routers will support the WPA3 standard and, as with the other standards listed here, you should always choose the latest standard supported by the wireless devices and routers.

*Diagram. A wireless network in ad-hoc mode.*
### **Ad-hoc**
In ad-hoc mode, all wireless communication is performed in a peer-to-peer fashion and does not require or involve a WAP. Ad-hoc wireless networks are rarely used in homes or offices, but they can be helpful in setting up a new device, such as a printer by connecting them directly, much as one would do with a physical cable. Ad-hoc networks are also occasionally used to transfer files between devices, such as between a camera and a laptop.
### **Infrastructure**
*Diagram. Wireless infrastructure mode.*

In almost all cases, a WAP or wireless router is used to connect wireless devices to the network. The WAP acts like an Ethernet switch in wired networking and often has a physical cable that connects it to the rest of the network. A wireless router is a WAP and a router combined into a single device and is most often used in home and small business environments to connect to the internet while also providing wireless connectivity for nearby devices.

Imagine you are a network administrator for a company with a sprawling office complex. You have network cables run to each office and cubicle in the building, but not all the offices and cubicles are occupied by employees. Some of these areas are often left unoccupied, which has encouraged temporary workers, such as contractors and vendors, to use these otherwise unused network ports to access the internet. The problem is that they also have access to the corporate network, creating a security concern for management. You need to find a way to stop the unauthorized users while being unobtrusive to the legitimate users in the company.

You could just disconnect each of the network cables while they are not in use, but that is a labor-intensive task that may not get performed quickly enough to satisfy your requirement. You need a more dynamic approach to the solution, one that could extend beyond the copper wiring of the building to include wireless connections as well. You need some form of network authentication and authorization.

The 802.1x security standard was designed to fit that exact situation. It provides network access control at the port level, whether physical or wireless, and it provides an authentication standard based on the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP). Authentication is typically done via a username and password, but you can also configure it to use public key infrastructure (PKI) certificates.

*Diagram. 802.1X Authentication.*

802\.1x grants trusted network access as follows:

1. The client requests access to the network via a WAP or a wired Ethernet switch and then provides credentials for the network access.
1. The WAP or switch forwards the network access request to a special authentication server running remote authentication dial-in user service (RADIUS) or EAP, which then validates the credentials and determines the user’s authorization based on policies defined by a network administrator.
1. If the credentials are validated and the user is authorized, the WAP or switch grants network access to the user.
1. If the user is not authenticated properly or does not have the authorization to access that network, the WAP or switch will block network access to the user.

The authorization policies used in 802.1x systems can also check the version of antivirus or malware scanners on a computer. If the user’s device does not conform to the corporate standard, the network administrator may configure the policy to permit limited network access, such as access to a server to update the antivirus software.