Skip to Content

Topics

Start Learning

Featured

Search 50,000+ courses, events, titles, and more

Glossary

10h 36m remaining

GLOSSARY

access control list (ACL) Access control lists are rules that grant or
deny access to computing resources such as files, directories, and other
objects. ACLs define what access is granted to the object and to whom
that access is granted. This article discusses these concepts further
within the context of Microsoft Windows:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/secauthz/access-control-lists

access control point An intentionally selected point of ingress or
egress that is restricted by design, monitoring, or physical limitation
that allows a facility owner to control entrance or exit for a physical
location.

access limitation Defines a condition in which the penetration tester
has restrictions on access at the beginning of testing. For example,
testing without the benefit of credentials, or testing weaknesses of
internal systems from outside of a protected network.

active information gathering Involves direct interaction with
organizational assets (network or otherwise) to gather information,
rather than indirect interaction via observation or details available
via external parties.

ad hoc mode In this mode, wireless clients (STA) are connected in a
peer-to-peer mode; ad hoc is commonly referred to as an Independent
Basic Service Set (IBSS).

Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) ARP is a protocol for finding the
physical machine address (MAC) of an IP address on a network subnet.

Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) A symmetric block cipher used in both
hardware and software to encrypt sensitive information.

advanced persistent threat (APT) An individual or group of individuals
(as opposed to through automation) with the resources to establish
persistent, stealthy, long-term footholds that target specific goals and
specific victims utilizing opportunistic attacks. An APT can also be a
highly skilled and sophisticated threat actor that is motivated to steal
sensitive or valuable information.

Android Emulator A computer software program that simulates the
functionality of an Android device.

Android Package Kit (APK) A packaged file format that includes the
necessary files to run an application on the Android operating system.

Applicability Statement (AS2) AS2 is an HTTP- and MIME-based protocol
developed by IEEE for transmitting business to business (B2B) messages
(especially electronic data interchange, or EDI, messages) securely.

application container An OS-level virtualization method that is used to
control the execution of a single service. Typical operating systems
like Linux and Windows allow for multiple processes and services to be
running simultaneously. An application container is strategic in nature
and is designed for a single purpose. Security is typically baked in
from the start, as the attack surface is limited to the service hosted
in the container.

application programming interface (API) A set of standards and software
instructions that provide a structured way of programmatically
interfacing with an application.

architecture overview A step in the threat modeling process that
documents what an application or system does, describes how it is
physically and logically implemented, and identifies the technologies
that are in use.

array An object containing a group of elements of the same data type
(e.g., integer or string).

authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) Authentication,
authorization, and accounting, when referred to as AAA (triple-A),
references a framework or family of protocols designed to mediate
network access. Authentication identifies a user. Authorization
establishes what that user is permitted to access or what activities the
user is permitted to perform. Accounting is tracking what is done by
that user when that access is used.

backdoor A persistence mechanism that allows an attacker to maintain
control of a target if the remote connection is dropped temporarily.

badge cloning The process of duplicating a valid identity (such as an
RFID proximity card) that can be used as an authenticator to gain access
to a restricted area.

Basic Service Set Identifier (BSSID) The BSSID is a physical address for
a wireless access device, including wireless APs and routers. BSSIDs
allow differentiation of access points within a single WLAN and are
included in all wireless packets.

binary analysis The process of examining the functions and purpose of a
compiled program or application at the architecture instruction level.
In a security context, binary analysis is often used in order to
identify vulnerabilities that can be exploited.

binary search A search algorithm that takes the middle element of the
array and compares it to the target value. If the middle element
matches, it is returned. However, if the value is greater than the
middle element position, the lower half of the array is discarded. This
method can be used to help speed up SQL injection attacks.

biometrics Measures human characteristics that can be used as a
complementary authentication solution. They rely on a human attribute
such as a retina, fingerprint, voice, etc., to permit access to an
information system or a restricted area in an organization's facility.

black box testing Testing where nothing about the design, structure, or
operation of a system, software, or organization is disclosed as part of
testing.

bluejacking A method of sending unsolicited messages to mobile users
without actually pairing the device by taking advantage of a loophole in
the technology's messaging options.

bluesnarfing The process of exploiting vulnerabilities found in certain
Bluetooth firmware in order to steal information from a wireless device.

Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) BLE is a Bluetooth implementation designed to
require significantly reduced power consumption. It is ideal for usage
in mobile and specialized devices.

broadcast storms An excessive amount of broadcast traffic that occurs
within a short period of time such that it may disrupt normal operation
and cause loops in the network, where a broadcast frame is bounced back
and forth between switches due to redundant paths. These are typically
caused by loops that are created as a result of improper blocking of
redundant paths.

brute-force attack An attack against a hash, for example, would be
trying every possible combination within the keyspace to break a hash,
regardless of dictionaries. Brute-force authentication attacks can be
described as a way to attempt to bypass authentication controls by
repeatedly sending different content until a valid value is found and
authentication succeeds.

buffer overflow An error condition created when a program writes more
data to a buffer than it has space allocated to contain. Overrunning the
established buffer boundary causes the program to overwrite adjacent
memory locations.

bump key A device that enables someone to bypass a vulnerable lock by
applying an impact force to the device while it is inserted in a lock.

certificate authority (CA) A trusted entity that signs, issues, and
manages digital certificates (i.e., identities) for hosts or users,
which are used to establish secure communication.

cold boot attack An attack method discovered by Princeton University
researchers (roughly a decade ago) who were able to demonstrate the
ability to recover disk encryption keys from random access memory (RAM)
when the power is cycled on the device in cooled or frozen temperatures.

comma-separated value (CSV) CSV is a structured data format that uses
commas to separate fields of data.

command-line interface (CLI) An interface for user interaction with a
computer that uses text-based input and output.

Common Attack Platform Enumerations and Classifications (CAPEC) CAPEC is
a dictionary of known cyber attack patterns curated and maintained by
MITRE. It is searchable by mechanisms and domains of attack and other
criteria such as OWASP or ATT&CK categorizations. Where applicable,
CAPEC entries associate the data with relevant CWE entries.

Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) The CVE program is sponsored
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and is maintained and curated by
MITRE. CVE records within the CVE list contain uniquely numbered entries
describing security vulnerabilities or exposures and relevant references
about how they were found, how they were fixed, or how they work.

Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) An open security standard for
evaluating security vulnerability severity and generating a numerical
relative severity score based on criteria such as exploitability and
impacts to confidentiality, integrity, and availability when
successfully exploited.

Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) A list of known software and hardware
weaknesses curated and maintained by MITRE. Weaknesses are defined as
"flaws, faults, bugs, or other errors in software or hardware
implementation, code, design, or architecture that if left unaddressed
could result in systems, networks, or hardware being vulnerable to
attack (https://cwe.mitre.org/about/index.html).

comparison operator Compares one value to another.

compliance auditing A process of evaluating organizational controls to
determine their adherence to standards and regulations.

compliance-based assessment Testing an organization's ability to follow
and implement a given set of security standards (e.g., PCI, HIPAA,
FISMA) within an environment.

configuration auditing A comparison of system configurations to the
configurations described by accepted best practices or adopted secure
configuration baselines with the purpose of identifying security issues
or discrepancies that may need to be addressed.

credentialed vulnerability scanning A scan conducted by a vulnerability
scanner that has been given access to the system with the same rights as
an authorized user.

cross-site request forgery (CSRF) A security vulnerability that allows
an attacker to send a malicious request to a targeted individual that
causes the target to take an action they did not intend to take using
the user's established session authentication. This involves issuing one
or more HTTP requests without any unpredictable request parameters for
applications that rely solely on cookie-based session management.

cross-site scripting (XSS) XSS is a type of injection attack for
websites. Using this attack, an attacker can inject malicious scripting
content, temporally or persistently, using weaknesses in web application
programming and failures to appropriately sanitize user-controlled
input.

daemon Any program that performs any function as long as it runs in the
background and runs without being under the direct control of a user.

data loss prevention (DLP) A category of security tools and processes
designed to secure data from disclosure or misuse by enforcing rules for
ingress, egress, and access based on data classification criteria and
marking.

data mining The process of analyzing large data sets to reveal patterns
or hidden anomalies.

database (DB) An organized collection of structured data or information
stored in a computer system.

deception In social engineering attacks, deception is the
misrepresentation of one's identity or circumstances in order to
persuade a target to perform activities or reveal information that they
would not normally wish to; deception technology is a means to entice
attackers to follow false trails that increase visibility into the
attack, such as honeynets, honeypots, etc.

deconfliction The process of distinguishing pentest artifacts from
artifacts of an actual compromise or other activity to help resolve
contradictory conclusions or responses.

de-escalation A process for addressing potential issues as quickly as
possible in order to minimize or mitigate impact.

dictionary attack A type of password guessing attack that uses lists of
possible passwords as the source for its guesses.

distributed denial of service (DDoS) An attack type designed to render
the target unusable through the use of multiple distributed attack
resources. This attack typically attempts to do so by flooding the
target with network traffic or requests in an attempt to overwhelm the
target's capacity for operation.

DNS forward lookup Queries a DNS server using the fully qualified domain
name (FQDN) in order to get the IP address of the host.

DNS reverse lookup Queries a DNS server using an IP address in order to
get the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) that corresponds with the
host.

Domain Name System (DNS) A protocol within a set of standards that is
used to associate a computer name with an IP address.

Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) DNSSEC uses digital
signatures based on PKI to secure DNS data, to in turn secure DNS
transactions. Data owners sign the data, ensuring data origin
authentication and data integrity protection for DNS transactions.

double tagging A result of a switch port being configured to use native
VLANs, where an attacker can craft a packet and prepend a false VLAN tag
along with its native VLAN to bypass layer 3 access controls.

Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) DHCP is a network management
protocol designed to automatically supply hosts with IP information and
other networking data, like gateways and subnet masks, and store
assignment information on the DHCP server.

dynamic-linked library (DLL) A shared library concept implemented in
Microsoft operating systems. A DLL file (.dll extension) can contain
code, data, and resources much like a typical executable program (.exe
extension); however, it cannot be called directly like an .exe. The
library file can support multiple computer programs simultaneously, and
when software is removed from the operating systems, sometimes DLLs are
removed as well, leaving other computer programs vulnerable to DLL
injection attacks.

elicitation A social engineering process used to extract meaningful
information from a target.

evasion Challenging a security control successfully, such as deploying
malware in a location on a hard drive that does not get scanned by
antivirus software.

exfiltration (exfil) The process of unauthorized data movement from
inside a protected space to outside of it, whether by copying, transfer,
or retrieval (e.g., a screenshot of SQLi results).

Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) A framework for authentication
that is used in WPA and WPA2 networks.

Extensible Markup Language-Remote Procedure Call (XML-RPC) XML-RPC is a
protocol used for remote communications with services using XML as the
payload. This uses HTTP/S as the transport for communication, with XML
as the encoding mechanism. XML-RPC is used frequently for web services
and can be victim to XML serialization issues or authentication issues
that might expose unintended data.

false positives Conditions identified during automated or manual testing
that result in the incorrect identification of an issue.

File Transfer Protocol (FTP/FTPS) File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and FTP
over SSL (FTPS) are protocols for transmitting and receiving files over
a network.

flow control Determines how program execution should proceed (like
loops).

footprinting The process of identifying the nature of systems or
organizations through reconnaissance. It is how you shape your
reconnaissance activities and interpret the results.

fuzzing A security testing technique that sends unexpected, random data
to an input control within an application or network service to generate
errors in the hopes of discovering or exposing security weaknesses that
could be exploited.

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) An EU law that defines rules
for data processing and handling of personally identifiable data of
persons in the EU. The law applies to all organizations and entities who
store, process, or collect personally identifiable information of
persons in the EU.

goals-based assessment Testing in which the attainment of agreed-upon
goals determines the success or failure criteria of testing, as opposed
to compliance-based testing, where the success/failure goals are
determined by the degree of compliance to regulations and standards as
determined by testing.

graphics processing unit (GPU) Specialized computer hardware chips
designed for acceleration of graphics rendering. In pentesting, used by
password cracking tools to accelerate password hash cracking efforts.

Group Policy Object (GPO) A collection of settings that govern user and
computer configurations within an Active Directory (AD) network.

Group Policy Preferences (GPP) A set of optional extensions provided to
expand the functionality of Group Policy Objects (GPOs). GPP allows
Active Directory (AD) domain administrators to create domain policies to
automate tedious tasks, such as changing the local Administrator account
password on the host operating system.

Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/HTTPS) Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) and HTTP Secure (HTTPS) are protocols for communication between
web servers and web clients. Communication generally occurs in pairs of
requests and responses.

identity and access management (IAM) Within the context of the cloud,
IAM is a web service for controlling access to cloud resources, such as
with AWS. In a more general computing context, IAM is a series of
processes to manage access within an enterprise.

industrial control system (ICS) Industrial control systems are systems
that relate to industry automation of all types, for example,
manufacturing, power generation (power plants), and water treatment and
distribution systems.

Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) IoT devices that have been purposed
for use in industrial sectors and applications.

Information Systems Security Assessment Framework (ISSAF) The ISSAF is a
full security assessment methodology that applies to security auditing
as well as other types of security testing. It defines three phases of a
pentest: planning and preparation, assessment and reporting, and
cleanup. ISSAF provides best practices for engagement management,
including pre- and post-assessment actions, risk assessment methodology,
and information gathering for all kinds of security assessment, not only
pentests.

Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) A cloud computing service that
provides on-demand network, storage, and computing resources.

insider threat A type of individual with insider knowledge of an
organization or who has privileged access to an organization's
information systems and is motivated based on revenge and retaliation
for being fired or seeks to sell secrets for financial gain.

Intelligent Platform Management Interface (IPMI) IPMI is a hardware
technology whose protocol allows remote management of server hardware
using a baseboard management controller (BMC) or management controller
(MC). Examples include HP iLO, Dell DRAC, and Supermicro IPMI. With
IPMI, administrators can monitor and manage peripherals and other
hardware, perform reboots, and even reinstall the host from outside of
the operating system. Using KVM access provided by some systems,
attackers may even be able to use this to remotely access the OS
interactively.

International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) IMEI numbers are 15-digit
numbers that are unique to each mobile device and are used to identify
the devices on a mobile network.

International Organization for Standardization (ISO) ISO is a
nongovernment organization composed of multinational standards bodies.
ISO develops and publishes international standards. One example is
ISO/IEC 27001, which is a standard for information security management.

Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) A network protocol used to send
error messages and operational information between network devices when
communicating with another IP address. Most commonly found in usage by
ping and traceroute.

Internet of Things (IoT) Physical devices, objects, machines, or even
animals with embedded sensors, software, and other technology that
connect to networks and exchange data with other devices on the Internet
without the need for human interaction in doing so. Most smart devices
(thermostats, refrigerators, cameras, etc.) fall into this category, but
pacemakers, biochips, and automobile sensors also qualify.

Internet Protocol (IP) IP is the network layer communications protocol
used by the Internet.

Internet service provider (ISP) ISPs are companies that provide Internet
connections and services to individuals and organizations.

intrusion prevention system (IPS) IPSs are network security controls
implemented in software or hardware that examine network traffic for
patterns of attack and proactively prevent that traffic from reaching
its intended target or issue an alert based on the detected behavior so
that other action can be taken, as in the case of intrusion detection
system (IDS) settings.

iOS App Store Package (IPA) A Zip-compressed archive containing the
necessary files to run an application on the Apple iOS mobile
architecture.

iOS simulator A function of the iOS developer tool kit (XCode) that can
mimic the basic behavior of an iDevice and how it interacts with an iOS
application.

jailbreaking The process of exploiting a software vulnerability in iOS
that enables low-level execution with elevated privileges (i.e., root)
in order to remove restrictions imposed by Apple to customize the device
and install unapproved applications.

Java Archive (JAR) A package file format that includes all of the
necessary resources (class files, images, text, etc.) into one resource
for a Java application to execute successfully.

JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) JSON is a lightweight,
self-describing, human-readable, structured data format.

Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) A type of standard used for debugging and
connecting to embedded devices on a circuit board.

Kerberos A network authentication protocol that leverages a ticketing
system to allow hosts and users operating over the network to prove
their identity to one another in a secure fashion.

keylogger A program used to record the keystrokes of a victim while
using a computer.

Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) LDAP is a vendor-neutral
and industry standard protocol for applications to interact with
directory services, such as Active Directory.

linear search A sequential process of evaluation where every value is
checked until the correct value has been identified.

link-local multicast name resolution (LLMNR) A Microsoft protocol that
is designed to allow Microsoft systems to perform name resolution by
broadcasting queries to other Microsoft systems on the same multicast
domain.

local area network (LAN) A group of devices connected together by a
network in a single physical location, such as an office building or
residence.

Local Security Authority Subsystem Service (LSASS) LSASS is a Microsoft
Windows process that enforces security policy on the system, including
the LSA model. The Local Security Authority (LSA) is an authentication
model in Windows operating systems that provides additional beneficial
features and options, such as support for multifactor authentication
(e.g., smart cards), custom security packages, and credential management
in order to support interaction with non-Microsoft products, such as
other networks or databases. It is frequently attacked as part of
credential theft attacks.

lock A device that can be installed in an entranceway (i.e., doors) or
other storage containers (i.e., cabinets) to help keep unauthorized
people out of restricted areas while allowing authorized personnel in.
Locks carry different locking functions (e.g., entrance locks and
deadlocks) to satisfy various types of protection requirements.

lock bypass The process of defeating a locking mechanism without
operating the lock at all.

lock pick A tool to help defeat the locking mechanism within a lock when
a key is not available.

lock picking Includes various techniques to defeat the locking mechanism
such as single pin picking (SPP), jiggling and raking, and using bump
keys.

loop An instruction that repeats while a given condition is true until
the condition is false.

Mail Exchange (MX) An MX record is a DNS resource record that defines
the mail server that accepts e-mail for the domain. This is useful for
reconnaissance. Targeting a backup mail server for phishing may face
fewer or different security controls in weakly configured environments.

master service agreement (MSA) A contractual document that governs the
relationship between two organizations or business partners and is
designed to simplify the process of establishing future contracts. The
MSA covers things such as payment terms, dispute resolution, and terms
of mutual responsibility.

media access control (MAC) MAC is part of the data link layer of a
network. MAC governs communication to and from the network interface
card (NIC). MAC addresses are hardware addresses for devices used to
uniquely identify them on a network.

memorandum of understanding (MOU) An MOU is a preliminary document
generated prior to penetration testing that has a legal purpose. This
document defines the roles and responsibilities of each party, documents
any laws or regulations being observed during the interaction, and
defines the intent of the two parties to interact for a pentest, but it
is not as detailed as an RoE. It is most often used when a client has
regulatory requirements or has other government contract requirements.

Microsoft Remote Procedure Call (MSRPC) A protocol that allows a remote
user to call procedures on a remote system as though they were calling
it from the local system.

mobile device management (MDM) MDM is a series of tools and policies
that allow organizations to monitor, manage, secure, and enforce
policies on smart phones and other mobile devices, such as tablets.

name server (NS) Name servers contain hostname to IP address mappings
for hosts, typically in support of DNS. These servers have various
record types that contain information about services, hosts, and other
domain-related information.

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) NIST is a
nonregulatory agency that is part of the U.S. Department of Commerce. In
addition to being a physical science laboratory, the organization
creates and promotes standards for various scientific fields, including
standards for information security and cyber defense.

National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication (NIST
SP) NIST special publications typically contained detailed
specifications about special research areas, including best practices
and guidance about topics such as information security and cyber
defense. Of interest to pentesters are the 800 and 1800 series papers.

near field communication (NFC) NFC refers to short-range wireless
communication technology commonly found in cell phones, mobile devices,
and some forms of access badges.

Nessus Attack Scripting Language (NASL) A proprietary language developed
by Tenable used to develop Nessus plugins, which contain vulnerability
information, remediation details, and the logic to determine the
presence of a security weakness.

NetBIOS Name Service (NBT-NS) NBT-NS is a fallback name lookup service
found on Microsoft Windows systems and often exploited with the
Responder tool. This is sent to broadcast domains rather than multicast
domains, unlike LLMNR.

netgroup A group of users or hosts used for permission checking when
permitting remote operations such as mounting file shares, remote
logins, remote execution, etc., in Linux and UNIX network domain (e.g.,
NIS or LDAP) environments.

Network Access Control (NAC) Built from the principles of IEEE 802.1x,
this controls what devices are allowed to connect to a network by
implementing a set of protocols and policies that enforce requirements
for authentication during connection to the network, such as posture
checking or whitelisting.

network address translation (NAT) Enables translation of a private
(nonroutable) network address to a public (routable) address.

Network Basic Input/Output System (NetBIOS) Helps facilitate the
communication of Microsoft applications over a network and provides
services such as protocol management, messaging and data transfer, and
hostname resolution.

Network File System (NFS) NFS is a file system and a protocol that
enables network file sharing for \*NIX operating systems.

Network Time Protocol (NTP) NTP is a protocol for syncing time across
multiple systems.

New Technology LAN Manager (NTLM) NTLM is a password algorithm for
Microsoft Windows that uses RC4 encryption and supports passwords
greater than 14 characters. Network-based authentication versions are
NetNTLM and NetNTLMv2, where additional nonces are added to protect the
underlying password storage.

Nmap scripting engine (NSE) An embedded Lua programming language
interpreter that provides features that help automate various tasks such
as information discovery and exploitation techniques.

noncredentialed vulnerability scan Shows what the attack surface looks
like to an untrusted user. Organizations could analyze the results and
prioritize where to focus their initial defense tactics.

nondisclosure agreement (NDA) A confidentiality agreement that protects
a business's competitive advantage by protecting its proprietary
information and intellectual property.

Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) The OWASP project
(https://www.owasp.org) is a nonprofit organization and open-source
community effort that produces tools, technologies, methodologies, and
documentation related to the field of web application security. OWASP
has many well-known publications and resources, such as the OWASP Top
Ten, OWASP Testing Guide, the OWASP ZAP Project, DirBuster, and Webgoat.

open-source intelligence (OSINT) OSINT refers to any information that
can be obtained through legal means using publicly available sources.

Open-Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM) OSSTMM is a
guide released by ISECOM, which they describe as a complete pentest
methodology designed to assure thorough, legal, consistent, and
repeatable testing that can be measured.

operating system (OS) An operating system is the kernel and supporting
programs that handle disk, memory, process, and other key transactions
interacting with hardware. The OS typically has a kernel that does much
of the lifting, but also drivers, user-mode programs, and other aspects
that are bundled together to make a platform for users or services to
use for execution.

passive information gathering The process of assessing a target to
collect preliminary knowledge about the system, software, network, and
people without actively engaging a target or its assets.

Password-Based Key Derivation Function 2 (PBKDF2) PBKDF2 is an algorithm
used by WPA and WPA2 to help derive the PMK, a shared secret key to
protect the handshake.

Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) PCI-DSS is an
industry-enforced standard that defines a series of rules that
businesses that process payments using payment cards should follow in
order to better secure card data and transactions.

penetration testing execution standard (PTES) PTES is a community-driven
effort to establish standards for penetration testing that is
contributed to by a number of professionals in the pentest consulting
community. It was created in an effort to disambiguate what is meant by
"pentest" for businesses seeking security testing services. The standard
provides best practices for the steps that should typically be taken as
part of a pentest, including reporting, intelligence gathering, threat
modeling, and vulnerability analysis, and it explains concepts within
the scope of exploitation and post-exploitation.

pentester A security professional responsible for identifying weaknesses
within the security support structure of the organization and simulating
attacks that are applicable to the organization's threat profile.

perimeter barrier (preventative perimeter control) A physical security
protection to help delay an attack or reduce damage to the facility,
such as a gate, concrete barrier, or fence.

persistence A technique used to maintain an attack presence within a
target environment.

phishing A fraud technique delivered through e-mail, phone, or text
message that is used to obtain sensitive information from the target or
to deliver a payload to establish a foothold in a network.

piggybacking A type of social engineering where an authorized employee
with legitimate access allows the unauthorized individual through a door
because he or she appears to be trustworthy.

pivoting A lateral movement technique that can allow an attacker to move
from host to host using remote access tools such as SSH, Telnet, FTP,
RDP and VNC.

PowerShell (PS) PowerShell is a Microsoft-created command-line shell,
scripting language, and configuration management framework designed to
be an automation solution for Windows-based systems.

preshared key (PSK) PSK is used as part of an authentication method for
WPA-Personal networks. The PSK (password) can be between 8 and 63 ASCII
characters in length, and is a single shared password used by each
endpoint on the wireless network.

pretexting (pretext) A false context developed to justify other actions
or make them believable to a victim.

privileged-level access Used to describe any level of access above and
beyond that of an average user (e.g., access that enables one to perform
administrative actions).

programmable logic controller (PLC) A specialized computer used in
industrial automation solutions for the control of manufacturing
processes.

property list (plist) XML-formatted files stored in binary or text
format that provide configuration settings and property data for many
kinds of Apple applications.

protocol A set of formal rules that describe the functionality of how to
send and receive data.

public key infrastructure (PKI) PKI houses the certificates, roles, and
facilities to support public key encryption. Public key encryption uses
private and public keys for encryption, storing the public keys in an
easy-to-access place such as a PKI or even on websites. Public keys can
be known by anyone and are used to encrypt information for the private
key holder; however, these certificates can be revoked, and the PKI
tracks revoked certificates as well. Only the person with the private
key can decrypt that message. Similarly, if someone signs a message with
their private key, holders of the public key can validate that the
private key holder signed it. PKI typically uses algorithms like RSA and
DSA to generate certificates and sign them.

race condition Two separate inputs compete on the basis of time for
processing a single target such that the order of processing may produce
unexpected or undesirable results.

radio frequency identification (RFID) A wireless communication standard
that uses radio waves to read data stored on a tag from a distance. This
data can then be compared to an authentication database and used as part
of an authorization enforcement system.

rainbow tables Contain precomputed hash values of a defined length that
can be used to speed up the process for offline password cracking.

reconnaissance (recon) A preliminary surveillance technique used to
gather intelligence about a target organization or its assets (i.e.,
people, processes, and technology).

red team assessment Involves stealth and blended methodologies (i.e.,
network penetration testing and social engineering) to conduct scenarios
of real-world attacks and determine how well an organization would fare
given the use of the customer's existing counter-defense and detection
capabilities (i.e., what can an attacker do with a certain level of
access).

registers (memory registers) Memory registers frequently hold pointers
that reference memory. For example, the execution instruction pointer
(EIP) is a register that stores a pointer to where in memory (the memory
address) the current instruction is executing.

remediation A process used to fix or resolve an unwanted deficiency. A
remediation (remedy) could be a recommended solution (i.e., people,
process, technology) to fix a problem.

remote access trojan (RAT) RATs are malware that are designed to allow
remote access and administrative capabilities to the infected system,
but are disguised as other programs.

Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) RDP is a remote administration protocol
designed by Microsoft to allow graphical access to Windows systems.

request for comment (RFC) An RFC is a numbered publication written by
individuals or groups of engineers that typically describes research,
protocols, methods, or other innovations with the purpose of soliciting
peer review or conveying the information to a broader audience. RFCs
from the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) are used to define how
TCP/IP should work, for example.

RFID cloning (badge cloning) The process of reading a series of bits
from one RFID card (or key fob) and writing the same series of bits to
another compatible card or replaying it as part of an authentication
attempt.

risk appetite The level of risk the organization is willing to accept in
order to achieve its goals---for instance, risk versus reward.

root bridge A feature of the Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) that serves as
a reference point for all switches in a spanning tree topology.

rooting Using mobile device exploitation to take advantage of a software
vulnerability in the Android operating system that enables low-level
execution with elevated privileges (i.e., root) and enables the user to
make modifications to the operating system that were not necessarily
intended by the manufacturer.

rules of engagement (RoE) A document that puts into writing the
guidelines and constraints regarding the execution of a pentest, most
importantly what is and is not authorized for testing.

scope Pentesting limitations that can typically be found in the
statement of work (SOW) and describe the work activities that are to be
completed during the pentest.

scope creep Occurs during a pentest when additional tasks or testing
activities are added to the project and exceed the original expectations
of the statement of work, which can negatively affect the overall
schedule or delivery of the final pentest report.

Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) S/MIME is a secure
extension for mail that supports encryption and signing of messages
using public key encryption. S/MIME uses typical SMTP servers and
communication, but the extensions and mail system capabilities allow
users to send encrypted messages using public key encryption, and as
long as the material is trusted, users can validate the sender's and the
message's authenticity.

Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) SSL is a standard technology designed to
secure network communications by establishing an encrypted link between
the client and server. See also Transport Layer Security (TLS).

security accounts manager (SAM) A local database file that contains
local account settings and password hashes for the host.

security information and event management (SIEM) SIEMs are systems that
aggregate log and event data and security alerts in a centralized
location for correlation and analysis.

security operations center (SOC) An SOC is a centralized organizational
function designed to handle monitoring, analysis, detection, and
response to security events, alerts, and incidents.

segmentation fault (segfault) Caused by a software program attempting to
read or overwrite a restricted area of memory.

Server Message Block (SMB) SMB is a client-server protocol for file and
resource sharing over a network.

service A software implementation that carries out the formal rules of a
protocol for a specific computing platform.

service level agreement (SLA) An SLA is a document or contract language
that defines measurements for the expectations between the customer and
the service provider, as well as terms of what happens if those
expectations are not met.

service principal name (SPN) Unique identifier of each instance of a
Windows service.

Service Set Identifier (SSID) Wireless APs manage wireless networks and
broadcast a case-sensitive, 32-alphanumeric character SSID to advertise
a network's existence. The SSID is the name of the WLAN.

Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) SIP is a protocol used for voice,
video, and messaging for applications of Internet telephony.

Set Group ID (SGID) SGID is a \*NIX file permission that allows a user
to execute the file using group permissions other than the normal group
permissions of the user account.

Set User ID (SUID) SUID is a \*NIX file permission that allows a user to
execute a file with the rights of another user.

shell escape An attack technique used to escape restricted shells in the
Linux or UNIX operating system.

Short Message Service (SMS) SMS is technology used for sending and
receiving text messages for mobile phones.

Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Used for the delivery of electronic
mail.

Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) An application-layer network
monitoring protocol, originally defined under RFC 1157, that provides
functionality to collect and organize information about devices over the
network and make changes to a device's behavior.

single sign-on (SSO) Enables users to enter a username and password one
time. The authentication and authorization server generates a session
that can then be used as a trusted identity for accessing known
applications, depending on the permissions and rights for which the user
has been authorized.

SMS phishing (smishing) A social engineering technique used to target
victims through SMS messages and may use different motivational
techniques like scarcity or fear to entice the victim to perform an
action, like clicking on a malicious URL within the message.

software-defined radio (SDR) SDRs are radio systems whose components
have traditionally been implemented in hardware and that implement
properties like bandwidth, signal strength, and other radio functions in
software or firmware.

software development kit (SDK) A set of software tools used by
programmers for the development of applications.

software development lifecycle (SDLC) A structured process for
developing software that is designed to achieve high-quality and
cost-effective results. Examples of process components include design,
analysis, maintenance, and testing.

solid-state drive (SSD) SSDs are storage devices that use flash-based
memory for faster performance.

solid-state hybrid drive (SSHD) SSHDs are storage devices that have both
flash-based storage and the features of a traditional hard drive (a
spinning disk and actuator arm). These attempt to enable larger storage
capacity with better performance.

Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) A layer 2 protocol that runs on network
devices such as bridges and switches and helps prevent looping in
networks that have redundant paths.

spear phishing A social engineering technique that targets a specific
set of individuals within a group or an organization to get individuals
to execute a specific action, such as clicking a URL in an e-mail.

SSL stripping A man-in-the-middle (MiTM) attack technique used to force
the user to connect to an endpoint over plaintext communication. This
technique can be used to capture login credentials or other sensitive
information that is typically protected when the communication is
encrypted.

stack pointer A memory register that stores the addresses of the last
program request in a stack.

statement of work (SOW) Outlines the project-specific work to be
executed by a service vendor for an organization.

static analysis A debugging method used to examine source code,
bytecode, and binaries without execution.

string operations Program operations that are used to manipulate string
data.

Structured Query Language (SQL) SQL is a language for accessing and
manipulating databases.

stumbling Wireless reconnaissance technique that is used for wireless
network discovery and enumeration.

substitution Variable substitution occurs when accessing or manipulating
the value of a variable (e.g., \$var), such as using variable expansion.
An example would be accessing the length of the variable in a shell
script using \${#var}.

supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) SCADA systems are
industrial control systems (ICSs) that allow monitoring, logging, and
control of remote ICS components such as sensors, PLCs, and others by
using human-machine interface (HMI) software.

switch spoofing A type of VLAN hopping attack that occurs when an
attacker can emulate a valid trunking switch on the network by speaking
802.1Q.

tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) TTPs are used to describe the
behaviors of an attacker during an attack. An easy way to think of this
is to ask three questions: Why did the attacker do this (tactic)? What
did the attacker do (technique)? How did the attacker do it (procedure)?

tailgating Similar to piggybacking in the sense that an unauthorized
person gains access to a restricted area by following an authorized
employee with legitimate access; however, the employee did not provide
consent and likely has no idea the unauthorized person came through the
door.

target selection A process by which the assets are selected and is a
phase of testing preparation. It involves some degree of discussion or
thought (and maybe even research and consent) about what to scope in for
testing and what to scope out for testing.

technical constraints Technology limitations imposed on a penetration
test either by the requirements of the customer being tested or the
nature of the test itself. Technical constraints may also exist for
customers and create limitations for the implementation of certain
technology or mitigation strategies.

Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP) TKIP is symmetric encryption that
uses WEP programming and RC4 encryption algorithms and encrypts each
data packet with a stronger and unique encryption key. It also uses a
cryptographic message integrity check, an IV sequence mechanism that
includes hashing, a rekeying mechanism to ensure key generation after
10,000 packets, and a per-packet key-mixing function to increase
cryptographic strength. These were designed to add extra protection
against social engineering, replay and injection attacks, weak-key
attacks, and forgery attempts.

threading Used in computer programs to execute multiple tasks in
parallel in order to optimize the speed and efficiency of program
execution.

threat actor An individual or group that seeks to harm a business or
organization and is motivated through financial, personal, or political
gain.

threat modeling An iterative process that seeks to identify
organizational assets, define security profiles, identify and prioritize
threats, and determine the appropriate countermeasure to mitigate the
risk.

time to live (TTL) TTL is a measurement of how many network hops a
packet is allowed to traverse before it expires and is discarded by a
router. This can also refer to how long DNS cache servers cache query
data before making a new query.

timestomping A technique used to modify the timestamps of a file or
directory to disguise the possibility of compromise.

Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) TCP is the stateful transport layer
communications protocol used by the Internet.

Transport Layer Security (TLS) TLS is the successor to SSL encryption
and is designed for encryption and security at the transport layer of
communications. TLS is commonly used for HTTPS-based communications.

Unicode Transformation Format (UTF) The UTF standard defines character
encoding. The most common is UTF-8 using 8-bit characters, but Windows
and some other systems use UTF-16, or 16-bit characters. UTF encoding
can be converted between characters for compatible characters, but it
primarily provides a reference for defining the character codes across
systems.

uniform resource identifier (URI) A URI is an RFC for defining
resources, which may include things like URLs and uniform resource names
(URNs) to identify resources, but may not necessarily define how to
access those resources. URIs and URLs are frequently used
interchangeably when discussing web, FTP, and other
\<protocol\>://\<location\> formats. As the following example does not
include a protocol but it does identify a resource, it is a URI, not a
URL: data:,Foo%20Bar.

uniform resource locator (URL) A URL is a type of a URI that contains
information about how to access a specific resource. Typically, a URL
includes a protocol, hostname, and filename (e.g.,
https://derp.pro/foo.htm).

universal system bus (USB) USB is a standard for cabling, connections,
and protocols for communications with peripherals. There are various
versions for the protocol that include different features and
bandwidths. USB devices have an identifier that is made up of a vendor
ID and a product ID that helps systems identify the device.

User Datagram Protocol (UDP) UDP is a transport layer protocol that
layers on top of IP. It is not connection-oriented and does not
guarantee delivery of a packet, which means it has lower overhead but
also the potential for packet loss. It is frequently used for streaming
data that needs faster delivery time but also is resilient against some
data loss.

user-defined function (UDF) A way to extend MySQL with a new function
that works like a native (built-in) MySQL function such as CONCAT( ) and
can also be used to execute code.

user-level access This defines what a typical user within the
organization would have access to, such as an account on the network,
access to network shares, etc.

variable A placeholder in memory that contains a value.

virtual local area network (VLAN) A VLAN provides a logical segmentation
of a network that may use shared switches, routers, and other
infrastructure. This logical segmentation takes place through tagging
with technologies like 802.1Q, VTP, or other proprietary protocols.
Systems may be aware of their tagged VLAN/VLANs or it may be transparent
to them. Systems may also have more than one VLAN on an interface, and
various attacks on VLAN configurations and protocols may let a system
access VLANs that they were not intended to, known as a VLAN hopping
attack.

virtual machine (VM) A virtual machine uses virtualized hardware to
allow multiple machines to run on a single system. The system running
the VMs is known as the host system, and it runs a hypervisor---a
program either in user space or kernel space---that manages the
virtualization. VMs typically implement a subset of the features of a
processor, so not all of the processor features will be enabled, meaning
that not all operating systems can be emulated on all systems.

virtual private network (VPN) VPNs establish private connections between
two networks or a host and a network using IPSec, TLS, or other
protocols. VPN is used to extend a host's network to a remote network
securely over a public network. VPN server endpoints may support a
variety of protocols, and some of them may have additional options, such
as ciphers that TLS or SSL VPNs may support, leaving them vulnerable to
certain protocol attacks. VPNs can be used to extend a corporate
network, mask source IP address for scanning or other attacks, or
provide privacy in browsing and research.

virtual private server (VPS) Virtual private servers are leased VMs on
shared infrastructure that are designed to provide a cheap computing
facility to users.

Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) VoIP facilitates sending phone calls
over IP-based networks. Protocols like SIP or RTSP handle signaling for
connecting calls and then other protocols are used to send the data
packets. VoIP can use TCP or UDP and may be client-to-client or
client-server. Popular implementations include Asterisk, an open-source
VoIP server.

voice phishing (vishing) A social engineering technique using phone
calls that is used to extract sensitive information from a target or to
perform activities that they would not normally perform, such as
resetting the password of an iTunes account that does not actually
belong to the caller (pretext) or sending a wire transfer that should
not be sent (fraud).

vulnerability assessment scanner (VAS) A vulnerability assessment
scanner performs active scans against a system or network to identify
potential security weaknesses or vulnerabilities. Scanning may be
performed in an unauthenticated or authenticated state, with the
authenticated methods providing fewer false positives and the
unauthenticated scans requiring less overhead and control to scan, but
more interactions to eliminate false positives.

vulnerability mapping The process of mapping vulnerabilities to
potential exploits to help prioritize testing activities in preparation
for a pentest.

wardriving A tactical process for surveying an area for wireless access
points while in a moving vehicle. The goal is preliminary reconnaissance
and to pinpoint wireless networks and potential targets in a certain
area of interest.

waterholing A technique used to infect websites with malicious software
(malware) in order to capitalize on a target's or target group's trust
relationship with websites they commonly visit.

web application firewall (WAF) A WAF is a detective and protective
control that is designed to sit in front of a web server and identify
malicious traffic and either alert on it or block it. WAFs are most
effective if they are trained to a specific site; otherwise, generic
rules may have opportunities for evasion that will still leave certain
web applications vulnerable.

Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) Introduced as the interim replacement for
WEP for 802.11 networks and uses a preshared key (PSK) and Temporal Key
Integrity Protocol (TKIP) for encryption. WPA2 was later introduced to
enhance the 802.11 security standard with the use of the Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES).

Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS) A wireless network security standard
designed to allow users to set up secure wireless networks configured to
use either WPA or WPA2 and help to reduce the overall complexity of
associating additional hosts to the network. Having the added
convenience of pushing a button on the back of a wireless router to
enable your wireless client to associate with the network via WPS
instead of a preshared key (password) may be beneficial to some users.

Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) WMI provides instrumentation to
allow users or applications to gather information about the runtime
state of local or remote Windows systems. WMI can query aspects such as
hardware configurations, users, processes, and other information. WMI
also has a subscription model, where certain events can trigger actions.

Windows Remote Management (WinRM) Windows Remote Management is designed
for remote management of Windows Systems. WinRM can be used from the
command line via the winrs command or through PowerShell. WinRM uses
ports 443 or 5986 on most systems.

Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) The initial encryption protocol for the
802.11 standard used to protect wireless network communication. As the
name suggests, the WEP security standard was used to give wireless users
the same level of privacy as plugging in a wired cable to a network
switch. WEP uses the RC4 stream cipher for protecting the
confidentiality of the data in transit and a CRC-32 checksum for
integrity.

wireless access point (AP or WAP) A wireless AP is a device that creates
a wireless network (WLAN). Typically it connects to a wired network and
enables wireless devices to communicate with one another and with the
wired network.

wireless infrastructure mode The most common configuration in both home
and commercial applications. In infrastructure mode, the wireless
clients communicate with a central device called a wireless access point
(AP) instead of directly communicating with each other, like in ad hoc
mode.
