Skip to Content

Topics

Start Learning

Featured

Search 50,000+ courses, events, titles, and more

Appendix A Objective Map

Appendix B About the Online Content

Glossary

42m remaining

APPENDIX B

About the Online Content

This book comes complete with TotalTester Online customizable practice
exam software with 170 practice exam questions and other book resources,
including 10 simulated performance-based questions and downloadable
files to follow along with the exercises in Chapter 5.

System Requirements

The current and previous major versions of the following desktop
browsers are recommended and supported: Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Firefox,
and Safari. These browsers update frequently, and sometimes an update
may cause compatibility issues with the TotalTester Online or other
content hosted on the Training Hub. If you run into a problem using one
of these browsers, please try using another until the problem is
resolved.

Your Total Seminars Training Hub Account

To get access to the online content, you will need to create an account
on the Total Seminars Training Hub. Registration is free, and you will
be able to track all your online content using your account. You may
also opt in if you wish to receive marketing information from McGraw
Hill or Total Seminars, but this is not required for you to gain access
to the online content.

Privacy Notice

McGraw Hill values your privacy. Please be sure to read the Privacy
Notice available during registration to see how the information you have
provided will be used. You may view our Corporate Customer Privacy
Policy by visiting the McGraw Hill Privacy Center. Visit the
mheducation.com site and click Privacy at the bottom of the page.

Single User License Terms and Conditions

Online access to the digital content included with this book is governed
by the McGraw Hill License Agreement outlined next. By using this
digital content, you agree to the terms of that license.

Access To register and activate your Total Seminars Training Hub
account, simply follow these easy steps.

1\. Go to this URL: hub.totalsem.com/mheclaim

2\. To register and create a new Training Hub account, enter your e-mail
address, name, and password on the Register tab. No further personal
information (such as credit card number) is required to create an
account.

If you already have a Total Seminars Training Hub account, enter your
e-mail address and password on the Log in tab.

3\. Enter your Product Key: qtbr-r5kd-vkhx

4\. Click to accept the user license terms.

5\. For new users, click the Register and Claim button to create your
account. For existing users, click the Log in and Claim button.

You will be taken to the Training Hub and have access to the content for
this book.

Duration of License Access to your online content through the Total
Seminars Training Hub will expire one year from the date the publisher
declares the book out of print.

Your purchase of this McGraw Hill product, including its access code,
through a retail store is subject to the refund policy of that store.

The Content is a copyrighted work of McGraw Hill, and McGraw Hill
reserves all rights in and to the Content. The Work is Â© 2022 by McGraw
Hill.

Restrictions on Transfer The user is receiving only a limited right to
use the Content for the user's own internal and personal use, dependent
on purchase and continued ownership of this book. The user may not
reproduce, forward, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish, or sublicense the
Content or in any way commingle the Content with other third-party
content without McGraw Hill's consent.

Limited Warranty The McGraw Hill Content is provided on an "as is"
basis. Neither McGraw Hill nor its licensors make any guarantees or
warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including, but not
limited to, implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose or use as to any McGraw Hill Content or the
information therein or any warranties as to the accuracy, completeness,
correctness, or results to be obtained from, accessing or using the
McGraw Hill Content, or any material referenced in such Content or any
information entered into licensee's product by users or other persons
and/or any material available on or that can be accessed through the
licensee's product (including via any hyperlink or otherwise) or as to
non-infringement of third-party rights. Any warranties of any kind,
whether express or implied, are disclaimed. Any material or data
obtained through use of the McGraw Hill Content is at your own
discretion and risk and user understands that it will be solely
responsible for any resulting damage to its computer system or loss of
data.

Neither McGraw Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to any subscriber
or to any user or anyone else for any inaccuracy, delay, interruption in
service, error or omission, regardless of cause, or for any damage
resulting therefrom.

In no event will McGraw Hill or its licensors be liable for any
indirect, special or consequential damages, including but not limited
to, lost time, lost money, lost profits or good will, whether in
contract, tort, strict liability or otherwise, and whether or not such
damages are foreseen or unforeseen with respect to any use of the McGraw
Hill Content.

TotalTester Online

TotalTester Online provides you with a simulation of the CompTIA
PenTest+ (PT0-002) exam. Exams can be taken in Practice Mode or Exam
Mode. Practice Mode provides an assistance window with hints, references
to the book, explanations of the correct and incorrect answers, and the
option to check your answer as you take the test. Exam Mode provides a
simulation of the actual exam. The number of questions, the types of
questions, and the time allowed are intended to be an accurate
representation of the exam environment. The option to customize your
quiz allows you to create custom exams from selected domains or
chapters, and you can further customize the number of questions and time
allowed.

To take a test, follow the instructions provided in the previous section
to register and activate your Total Seminars Training Hub account. When
you register, you will be taken to the Total Seminars Training Hub. From
the Training Hub Home page, select your certification from the Study
drop-down menu at the top of the page to drill down to the TotalTester
for your book. You can also scroll to it from the list of Your Topics on
the Home page, and then click on the TotalTester link to launch the
TotalTester. Once you've launched your TotalTester, you can select the
option to customize your quiz and begin testing yourself in Practice
Mode or Exam Mode. All exams provide an overall grade and a grade broken
down by domain.

Other Book Resources

The following sections detail the other resources available with your
book. You can access these items by selecting the Resources tab, or by
selecting CompTIA PenTest+ All-in-One, 2e (PT0-002) from the Study
drop-down menu at the top of the page or from the list of Your Topics on
the Home page. The menu on the right side of the screen outlines all of
the available resources.

Performance-Based Questions

In addition to multiple-choice questions, the CompTIA PenTest+ (PT0-002)
exam includes performance-based questions (PBQs), which, according to
CompTIA, are designed to test your ability to solve problems in a
simulated environment. More information about PBQs is provided on
CompTIA's website. You can access the performance-based questions
included with this book by navigating to the Resources tab and selecting
Performance-Based Question Quiz. After you have selected the PBQs, an
interactive quiz will launch in your browser.

Downloadable Content

The Resources tab also includes links to download additional content
that accompanies this book. The downloadable content for this book
includes files to follow along with exercises in Chapter 5.

Technical Support

For questions regarding the TotalTester or operation of the Training
Hub, visit www.totalsem.com or e-mail support@totalsem.com.

For questions regarding book content, visit
www.mheducation.com/customerservice.

Copy

copy

Highlight

highlight

Add Note

note

Get Link

link

table of contents

search

Settings

queue
