### **MFA**
Multi-factor authentication (MFA), sometimes called 2-factor authentication (2FA), is an optional, but highly recommended, add-on to the authentication process described previously. If the authentication system requires MFA for your user account, you will see an additional prompt after you enter your username and password. The prompt may ask for something you have (such as a PIN on a key fob token) or something you are (a facial or retinal scan or a fingerprint).

If you have a recent mobile device from Apple, you probably already use Touch ID or Face ID. Many of the more expensive Android devices have similar features. In those systems, your username and password are stored within a secure area of the device that can only be unlocked using your fingerprint or a facial recognition scan. Once unlocked, your mobile device sends the username and password to the site you are attempting to access. This simplifies the way you access websites and applications because it minimizes the number of passwords that you must remember. In a similar way, you can unlock a computer running MacOS by using an Apple Watch. This is referred to as proximity-based security and works automatically if your watch is within a certain range of the MacOS computer. Apple is not the only one to simplify the process of logging into your computer. Microsoft Windows computers have a similar mechanism called Windows Hello, which can use your fingerprint or facial recognition to log in to your device.

The point of MFA is that even if someone steals your password through social engineering, brute force attacks, or any other way, they cannot access your device or data without the key fob or without your fingerprint or face. This makes it much more difficult for a potential attacker to impersonate you and maliciously access your account.
### **Why Harden Devices?**
Network devices, such as switches, routers, and firewalls have access to all data sent through them, which means they have access to a lot of your data. If these devices were compromised by a malicious user or attacker, the attacker would gain access to all of that data plus other information that could allow the attacker to change firewall rules and cause other damage to your network and the devices. These threats are even more potent when wireless networks are involved because just being in the vicinity may be enough to allow an attacker to gain access, change device settings, and eavesdrop on your network traffic.

This is why you must carefully and regularly review the security settings on your network devices, update the device software, and test the security of the device by attempting to breach its defenses. This process is known as hardening the security of a device, though the process also applies to servers and workstations.
### **How to Harden Devices**
There are some general security hardening steps that should be performed on all network devices as well as a few device-specific steps that differ by the type of device.
### **Change Default Passwords**
First and foremost, when you install a new or even previously used network device, be sure to change the device’s password. Never leave the device configured with its factory-default password. Attackers can easily search the internet and find the default password of nearly every brand and model of network device ever made. Unfortunately, due to laziness or ignorance on the part of the network administrator, attackers often succeed in logging in using the default password.
### **Remove Unnecessary Logins**
Closely related to the last point is to remove any unnecessary accounts (including the default users if possible) from the device. Unnecessary accounts, in this context, are those not used by you (at home) or the network administration team responsible for the device in question. Of course, you will first need to create replacement users and passwords for them, but this makes it that much more difficult for the attacker when they try and log in to your device as an admin, but you have deleted that account and created one with another name.

A second part of this recommendation is to periodically review the list of authorized users in each device and remove those that no longer need access (because they changed job roles, left the company, etc.). This is also a good time to make sure that no unrecognized accounts are on the device as well and to remove any that are found immediately along with changing all passwords and further hardening the device as quickly as possible to limit potential damage.
### **Enforce a Strong Password Policy**
Devices should require strong passwords for all users. If possible, enforce this policy through the device’s operating system; if not, make a company policy for everyone (including the administrators) to have a complex password (a long password of at least 10–12 characters with a combination of uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special symbols, subject to what the device supports). Additionally, each user should be required to change their password frequently (typically every 30-90 days, depending on the organization, sensitivity of the data being stored and moved across the network, etc.) to further limit damage if something is compromised. If the device can provide a report on the last time a password was changed, run that report and make sure that the policy is being followed.

If the device supports multi-factor authentication (MFA), be sure to require that as well and configure it properly for every user. Text messaging and email are not considered strong forms of MFA but are better than nothing if that is all that is available. Virtual MFA applications or physical tokens are better, if possible.
### **Remove Unnecessary Services**
If there are optional features installed on the device that you are not using, disable or remove them (depending on the device and platform) to reduce the risk of attack that service opens up. This is true for all of your devices, but especially the network ones. That said, if there are features that harden the device, you may wish to enable or add them to strengthen the defenses of the device.
### **Keep Patches Up to Date**
Be sure to patch every device to get the latest security updates installed before an attacker can exploit a security flaw. This is true not only for servers and workstations, but for every network device, storage device, wireless router, etc. that can be updated. Many times, security researchers discover a vulnerability and notify the manufacturer so they can fix it before publicly disclosing it 90 days or so after discovery. The manufacturer needs time to come up with and test the patch, make it available, and then you need to get it installed before an attacker finds out about it and starts looking for victims.
### **Limit Physical Access to the Device**
One of the basic tenants of security is that physical access equals access. As has been explained elsewhere in this course, if someone has physical access to a device, they can break into it if given enough time. Many network devices also have special ports or reset buttons on them that could allow an attacker who has physical access to make changes quite easily. Lock up your network devices and be sure to observe anyone who physically interacts with the device.
### **Only Allow Changes from a Trusted Network**
For all devices, but especially firewalls and wireless devices that are often exposed to the internet and the wider public at large, there are a couple of other precautions that should be followed:

- Disallow any changes from the public side of the network device.
- Disallow changes to a wireless access point or wireless router from other wireless devices.

The purpose of these restrictions is to ensure that the user is authorized and inside the network (see the previous point about limiting physical access in this regard as well).
### **Require Encryption for Wireless Networks**
Be sure to configure and enable WPA2 (or better yet, WPA3) so that the traffic crossing the network is encrypted as discussed elsewhere in this course. You may have seen networks on your phone, tablet, or computer that do not have the lock indicator beside the network name—they are open public networks. Even if you are redirected to a log-in page, that is usually for legal reasons, not for any encryption purposes. Never send confidential information across an unencrypted network, especially a public one.
### **Audit Access**
While all of the above recommendations are proactive in nature, it is possible that something slips through. To help you look for suspicious activity and to do a forensic analysis of when a device was breached, from where, and the methods used, you will need audit logs. Be sure to collect these logs and store them off of the device (and thus, out of the attacker’s reach). In fact, the lack of audit logs being created when they have been in the past can be a red flag that something is wrong. Syslog is a common way to gather the logs and send them to a Syslog server for storage. There are many applications, both commercial and open-source, that can review these logs and alert you when anomalies are detected and should be further investigated by a person.
###
###
### **Backup**
Keep backup copies of any device configuration files in case they need to be restored due to misconfiguration, attack, or device replacement, among other reasons. Devices on the network should also be backed up and stored remotely. These backups can be stored in the datacenter, but copies should be stored off-site in case of fire, flood, or other natural disasters as well as to protect against other problems that may affect the entire data center. This is your last line of defense in many cases.